Sim<on, the 12-year-old boy at the center of Ursula Meier's chilly, austere Sister, enters without introduction. We don't even get a good look at him for the first few minutes of the movie, because he hides his face beneath a ski mask and helmet. We learn about him simply by following him around a busy Swiss ski resort, apparently unnoticed by everyone but Meier's camera, as he goes about his business, which involves furtively stealing ski equipment from vacationers, hauling it down the mountain in the lift and re-selling it for bargain prices below.
Because he's a child, the boy is almost invisible. He can move freely among the well-off skiers without attracting much attention. So the mask, as it turns out, is a significant part of his identity. The one thing we know for sure about him is that he's not who he seems to be. And we spend the rest of the movie trying to figure him out.
Simon, a boy whose face, once we do see it, seems to be quite a bit older than the rest of him, lives in a cheap, one-bedroom apartment with his listless twentysomething sister, Louise, who shuffles through low-paying jobs and has a habit of disappearing with lowlifes who don't treat her terribly well. Mike, a Scottish chef working at the lift restaurant, responds to Simon's situation once he learns that the kid is an orphan hustling for grocery money and not a brat trying to scrape up some cash for DVDs and video games.
We know exactly what he means. The movie is divided into two realms, above and below. The man-made architectural mountain Simon lives in is in the drab, muddy reality at the bottom of the lift, a world-spanning tram ride away from the glistening white vacationland at the top. The majestic spectacle of the snowy Alps looms over everything in the brown lowlands, making them appear even more shabby and insignificant.
The boy is equally adept at selling to adults and other kids. He even takes special orders for select customers. And the movie views Simon as just another entrepreneur, capitalizing on the resort economy the way an independent developer might make use of the Internet. Before long, he's in business with Mike and has made the acquaintance of Kristin Jansen, a strikingly lovely blonde mother on holiday with her two boys, who are a few years younger than Simon. Starved for maternal affection but not wanting to come on too strong, he is attracted to and wary of her.
But what became of Simon and Louise's parents? We know they don't actually run a big luxury hotel, the story Simon tells Kristin. But did they really perish in a car accident, as he claims to others? How long have he and Louise been living like this? Is she really just his sister, or is there some other dimension to their relationship? And what's going to become of them?
Sister may answer some of those questions or it may not, depending on whom you believe and when. The movie takes a refreshingly low-key, observational approach to storytelling that will remind audiences not only of Loach, but of Francois Truffaut, the Belgian Dardenne brothers and countless other movies about scrappy, streetwise kids, living by their wits in a cold, indifferent world.
Director Meier's first film, Home, starred Isabelle Huppert and an even younger Kacey Mottet Klein. This one picked up the Silver Bear at the Berlin Film Festival and is on the short list for the best foreign language film Oscar as Switzerland's official submission.
Bill Murray wouldn't be my first thought for an actor to play President Franklin D. Roosevelt, but he may have been the right choice for Hyde Park on Hudson. The role requires him to show Roosevelt as a sometimes lonely and sad man whose vacation getaway is his mother's family mansion, Springwood, near Hyde Park in upstate New York.
We're accustomed to thinking of Roosevelt as a powerful man, elected four times to the presidency, and the leader of the free world in World War II. Here we see him as the captive of a female-dominated private life, where his mother; his wife, Eleanor, and his secretary, Missy, pretty much run things. To this domain in the summer of 1939, he invites a sixth cousin, Margaret Daisy Suckley, for a visit, and craftily begins a sweet romance with her under the eyes of the others, who understand much and accept much.
Murray makes a number of good choices for the character. He's smaller and thinner than Roosevelt, but wears his summer hat at a jaunty angle, keeps his cigarette holder tilted high, and has quiet humor in his speech. It was well but not widely known that Roosevelt was a polio victim, who had the cooperation of the press corps in never photographing him in his wheelchair. His convertible is modified to be driven with hands only, and he makes full use of this freedom of mobility to take fragrant Cousin Daisy for drives around the estate, where he leaves the Secret Service behind, treats her to views of his favorite landscapes, and seduces her to, as we might say, pleasure him.
To this bucolic retreat in June 1939, he receives guests whose visit could change the course of world history. England's King George V and Queen Elizabeth make a detour from their state visit to Canada, hoping to get Roosevelt's pledge to join in the war against Hitler. This is officially a social visit, and actually their crucial meeting with each other takes place late at night when George curses his stammer and Franklin curses his polio. Standing up with great difficulty and making his way by holding onto his desk, FDR explains that the public has little idea of his paralysis and gives a bracing talk to Bertie.
Daisy isn't present, of course, although the whole film is presented as her point of view. As Daisy, Laura Linney plays a 50-ish single woman with great sympathy and affection for her distant cousin. Roosevelt uses her as a confidant, in their first meeting proudly showing her his stamp collection, maybe as a test; later, he confides that when he's besieged by bores, they can usually be depended upon to drift away when his stamp albums come out.
This isn't a serious historical film. It plays different instruments than Spielberg's Lincoln. Murray, who has a wider range than we sometimes realize, finds the human core of this FDR and presents it tenderly. Much of the film is a comedy, including a typical American picnic at which the royals are served something called a hot dog. Elizabeth is not thrilled, but Bertie digs in gamely. Eventually, America joined in the war against Hitler. Daisy was there.
New Jerusalem tells the unexpected story of two lonely men, 30-ish, and the existential crisis of one of them. He is Sean Murphy, an Irishman who served with the U.S. National Guard in Afghanistan and is now living in Virginia. He works with Ike Evans in a used tire store in Richmond; Ike is concerned that Sean seems inward and depressed. He lingers uncertainly outside the rest room, knocks, and says, You all right in there?
Sean is not all right. He is in tears. Ike is one of those men with a look of perpetual concern on his face and an almost compulsive desire to be of help. He's a Christian, has been saved by Jesus, and assures Sean that Jesus will save him, too. They have a little talk about the meaning of killing in war, but this isn't a movie about war, it's about evangelism. Ike focuses on Sean eagerly, as a good prospect for conversion.
We see a little of their solitary lives. Sean lives in a small, basic house, hardly furnished except for a music system and a listless cat. He seems more concerned with his cat than himself. He joins Ike sometimes for lunch with some other Christian men, who solemnly pray before they eat. There are no women in the film except for a cashier in a convenience store who smooches a little with Sean, to no conclusion.
Ike takes Sean to a Sunday service of his church group, where Sean slowly begins to clap in time with a gospel tune and even forces a smile. The two men log time in coffee houses, where Sean's depression is evident, and Ike hesitantly reaches out to hold his hand. After the service, at his house, Ike washes Sean's feet. Sean's not in favor of that.
They have an argument about the efficiency of medication against Sean's depression, as opposed to being healed by Jesus. Ike seems to be controlling anger as he insists Jesus is the only way. He wants to help Sean so badly. The two performances are serious and contained; neither man seems to feel much joy.
I don't believe New Jerusalem takes a position in favor of either character. It's more of an intense study of these two men and their barren work in a shabby store by the side of a highway. Surprisingly, the same director and co-writer collaborated on another film that played not long ago at Facets, The Comedy. Two films could not be less alike. One vulgar and heartless. Now this one, so quiet and sad.
Rainer Werner Fassbinder premiered Veronika Voss in February 1982, at the Berlin Film Festival. It was hailed as one of the best of his 40 films. Late on the night of June 9, 1982, he made a telephone call from Munich to Paris to tell his best friend he had flushed all his drugs down the toilet — everything except for one last line of cocaine. The next morning, Fassbinder was found dead in his room, a cold cigarette between his fingers, a videotape machine still playing. The most famous, notorious and prolific modern German filmmaker was 36.
Does this film represent a premonition of his own death? It tells the story of a German actress who worked tirelessly and achieved great fame, but began depending on drugs and alcohol and eventually became so addicted that she sold her body and soul for drugs. Her fortune spent, her marriage destroyed, she began to live as an inpatient in the clinic of a sinister Berlin woman who billed herself as a psychiatrist but was also a Dr. Feelgood who strung along her patients on morphine and controlled them by withholding their supply. Their arrangement was that after Veronika Voss's death, her suburban villa and its art treasures would be inherited by the doctor.
The film opens in 1955 with Voss looking at one of her own pre-war classics. There was a time when she was welcomed in the offices of producers, greeted by headwaiters, recognized on the street. That time has passed, and it is painful to hear her remind people who she is — or was. One night, drinking without funds in a cabaret, she falls into conversation with a soft-faced sportswriter named Robert Krohn, who is old enough to remain under her spell. She grandly says she will pick up the check, then allows him to do it, and invites him to come home with her. All the furniture in her villa is covered in white sheets, the electricity is disconnected, and she has them light candles because they are so much more flattering to a woman. The star struck journalist has without realizing it walked into the last act of Veronika Voss's life.
Ending their evening suddenly, Veronika demands to be taken to the clinic of Dr. Katz, one of the stylish lesbians often found in Fassbinder films. This clinic could be imagined as the setting for a bizarre Fred Astaire dance number. It's all blindingly white — walls, floors, furniture, grand staircases, everyone's clothing. In an eerie touch, a wall of windows looks upon a waiting room, where other patients peer in needfully. Katz lives with a woman apparently her lover, and another constant companion is an African-American G.I. and drug dealer. This man is in the background of countless shots, never says anything, lurks when needed like a security guard, and was Fassbinder's sometime lover and an actor in many of his films.
We observe Veronika's frantic relationship with Katz, who berates her sadistically, and extracts details of the hours with Robert Krohn. Finally Veronika is shown to her narrow, cell-like room, and given the drugs she craves. In this room, and throughout the clinic, we hear incongruous American country & western songs. In Maria von Braun, where Günther Kaufmann plays Maria's G.I. lover, similar music is heard, probably via Armed Forces Radio, a reminder of the presence of American occupying forces in postwar Germany. At Veronika's own farewell party, she performs Memories Are Made of This, in a low, throaty torch-song voice perhaps intended to remind us of Marlene Dietrich. Indeed, Fassbinder's focus on Rosel Zech's reminds me of von Sternberg's Dietrich in The Blue Angel.
When Robert Krohn returns that day to his own apartment and girlfriend Henriette, he is almost proud to tell her where he spent the night, and she, also a writer for the newspaper, accepts this as an expression of his nature; she wants to know what Voss was like. Krohn, whose beat is hockey, convinces his editor he has lucked upon a major scoop about the decline and fall of a star.
Throughout Fassbinder's work we find such figures, great stars, mannered, decadent, in various stages of their decay. This film was inspired by the real life of Sybille Schmitz, a German star of the 1930s who also fell athwart of a clinic supplying drugs. Many critics look at Veronika Voss and are reminded of Gloria Swanson in Billy Wilder's Sunset Boulevard. Perhaps the association is intentional. When Veronika finally, with great difficulty, wheedles a bit part from her former agent, the director of the scene wears glasses and has his hat pushed back on his head, Wilder-style. She only has two lines in her scene, but blows them again and again. She's rattled and craves a fix. She is watched by Robert Krone and by her ex-husband Max Rehbein, who wearily explain to the sports writer that his former wife is a hopeless addict.
Two other patients of Dr. Katz figure importantly: A sweet elderly couple named the Treibels. Their story figures tragically in the history of Germany, as you will find. The psychiatrist, indeed, seems poised at the center of a cynical web of postwar corruption, including drug authorities and the police; when they twitch the web, she senses it immediately.
Fassbinder was an immensely productive filmmaker. In his 37 years he directed 40 features, 24 stage plays and two long TV miniseries. His death seems to have interrupted this flow in mid-stream. Powerfully influenced by the heavily stylized works of the German-Danish-American director Douglas Sirk, he may have worked at a feverish pace but his films always look carefully planned. In this film, for example, he evokes period b&w with a diversity of wipe shots, iris shots, pans, tracking, and the careful positioning of foregrounds. In other films he often uses zooms-in to underline dramatic points. His films are visually mannered, formal, and far from seeming improvised; the visual strategy of Veronika Voss suggests he was moving even closer toward the classic Hollywood style.
What an impression he made when he was alive! At Cannes every year he seemed to have at least one film, and you would see him at Le Petit Carlton, the famous bistro behind the Palais du Festival, on rue Felix-Faure, behind the Hotel Carlton. Fassbinder and his posse would be gathered inside, close inside the doorway. looking as discontented as usual. In August of 1983 at the Montreal Film Festival, as his close friend the director Daniel Schmid and I both served on the jury of the World Film Festival, the ghost of Fassbinder seemed almost like another presence in the city, Fassbinder had attended the 1981 Cannes Film Festival, nine months before his death, I remember him at dinner, unshaven, defensive, always smoking, ignoring the food and ordering a bottle of Cognac to be placed before him.
During the last weeks of his life, Schmid said, during those sad telephone calls at three in the morning, Fassbinder often repeated the same thing. He would shout at me: How are you able to just sit there and look outside the window? How can you? How can you just sit on a rock and look at the sea? How can everybody else be so lucky?
Fat Kid Rules the World is a movie with a title that might be misleading: It's a lot better than it sounds like it has any right to be.
Here is the story of a suicidal high school outsider that generates great sympathy for the character, and miraculously supplies him with a loving and supportive father, a reckless new friend who turns out to be good for him, and even a sexy classmate who likes his T-shirt. That has to be the first time a girl has ever told him anything like that.
It's not a smarmy feel-good movie, and it's not another dumb teenage comedy. It's smart and observant, and when its laughs come, they're of the dark humor variety.
Much of its success comes from a fresh 21-year-old actor named Jacob Wysocki, who was inspired in his leading debut opposite John C. Reilly in Terri, which I invited to Ebertfest this year. Knowing him to be outgoing and personable, I was struck by how convincing he is in this film's early scenes, as Troy Billings, a trudging, listless mouth-breather who exudes a deep sense of defeat. The fat kid he played in Terri was more transgressive. Here he's a boy with such low self-regard that he seems frozen in his tracks.
As the film opens, he tries to throw himself under a bus. His life is saved at the last possible moment by a druggie street kid named Marcus, a teenage con man; he quickly sees this sudden relationship as an opportunity to crash at Troy's house and raid the refrigerator. This scheme is greeted coolly by Troy's father, a crew-cut, no-nonsense ex-Marine who tries to run a tight ship.
Right away we expect Mr. Billings to be a sadistic drill sergeant, but actually he's a reasonable man who loves both of his sons and even has sympathy for Marcus because everybody deserves a chance.
The family's mother died not long ago, and now Mr. Billings cooks dinner every night for Troy and his brother, Dayle, who is forever doing his homework at the dining room table. Troy never visibly does homework, but claims he's good at math and everything else except gym. The two brothers are not hostile but more mutually uncomprehending.
At school, Troy isn't picked on, but more invisible. He gains a little credibility simply by being acknowledged by Marcus, a popular rebel, who, strictly speaking, has been expelled by the school. Able to improvise his way out of any situation, Marcus tells Troy they're going to form their own two-man punk rock band. Troy will be the drummer. Encouraged that his son is at last showing interest in something, Mr. Billings actually buys him a nice set of drums, which come with some rules: no rehearsals after 10 p.m.
Let me describe Troy's ability as a drummer this way: an infant pounding its mashed potatoes with a spoon has as much rhythm. Nevertheless, after Marcus does a fashion makeover for the kid by drawing with a Sharpie on a T-shirt, the word gets around that the two of them are in a band, and his classmate Isabel takes a sweet interest in him. Troy is not only fat but his round cheeks are inflicted with a bright red case of rosacea. What does Isabel see in him? She's sort of an outsider herself and enjoys what she interprets as his spunk.
Weathering this storm in his little family, Billy Campbell is spot-on as the father. No-nonsense middle-aged roles are hard to find, and although Campbell is well-known, especially from his television work, his performance here may intrigue casting directors with his possibilities.
Anyway, that's the set-up. The delivery is unexpected. Even what seems to be a public humiliation ends up making Troy a hit on YouTube. There are of course setbacks and alarming events, but what's affecting is how sensibly and kindly Mr. Billings responds. There's a quiet moment, easy to miss, when he calls Marcus son. And for such a straight arrow, he takes a big chance on behalf of the two boys.
Fat Kid Rules the World marks the directorial debut of Matthew Lillard, who like many actors is better with people than with the camera. There isn't dazzling directorial virtuosity here, but direct and economical filmmaking that focuses directly on the characters.
Lillard deserves more time behind the camera, and I think we'll be pleased to watch Wysocki's development as an actor. In the world of acting, many are thin but few are talented.
Ang Lee's Life of Pi is a miraculous achievement of storytelling and a landmark of visual mastery. Inspired by a worldwide best-seller that many readers must have assumed was unfilmable, it is a triumph over its difficulties. It is also a moving spiritual achievement, a movie whose title could have been shortened to life.
The story involves the 227 days that its teenage hero spends drifting across the Pacific in a lifeboat with a Bengal tiger. They find themselves in the same boat after an amusing and colorful prologue, which in itself could have been enlarged into an exciting family film. Then it expands into a parable of survival, acceptance and adaptation. I imagine even Yann Martel, the novel's French-Canadian author, must be delighted to see how the usual kind of Hollywood manhandling has been sidestepped by Lee's poetic idealism.
The story begins in a small family zoo in Pondichery, India, where the boy christened Piscine is raised. Piscine translates from French to English as swimming pool, but in an India where many more speak English than French, his playmates of course nickname him pee. Determined to put an end to this, he adopts the name Pi, demonstrating an uncanny ability to write down that mathematical constant that begins with 3.14 and never ends. If Pi is a limitless number, that is the perfect name for a boy who seems to accept no limitations.
The zoo goes broke, and Pi's father puts his family and a few valuable animals on a ship bound for Canada. In a bruising series of falls, a zebra, an orangutan, a hyena and the lion tumble into the boat with the boy, and are swept away by high seas. His family is never seen again, and the last we see of the ship is its lights disappearing into the deep — a haunting shot that reminds me of the sinking train in Bill Forsyth's Housekeeping.
This is a hazardous situation for the boy, because the film steadfastly refuses to sentimentalize the tiger. A crucial early scene at the zoo shows that wild animals are indeed wild and indeed animals, and it serves as a caution for children in the audience, who must not make the mistake of thinking this is a Disney tiger.
The heart of the film focuses on the sea journey, during which the human demonstrates that he can think with great ingenuity and the tiger shows that it can learn. I won't spoil for you how those things happen. The possibilities are surprising.
What astonishes me is how much I love the use of 3-D in Life of Pi. I've never seen the medium better employed, not even in Avatar, and although I continue to have doubts about it in general, Lee never uses it for surprises or sensations, but only to deepen the film's sense of places and events.
Let me try to describe one point of view. The camera is placed in the sea, looking up at the lifeboat and beyond it. The surface of the sea is like the enchanted membrane upon which it floats. There is nothing in particular to define it; it is just … there. This is not a shot of a boat floating in the ocean. It is a shot of ocean, boat and sky as one glorious place.
Still trying not to spoil: Pi and the tiger Richard Parker share the same possible places in and near the boat. Although this point is not specifically made, Pi's ability to expand the use of space in the boat and nearby helps reinforce the tiger's respect for him. The tiger is accustomed to believing it can rule all space near him, and the human requires the animal to rethink that assumption.
Most of the footage of the tiger is of course CGI, although I learn that four real tigers are seen in some shots. The young actor Suraj Sharma contributes a remarkable performance, shot largely in sequence as his skin color deepens, his weight falls and deepness and wisdom grow in his eyes.
The writer W.G. Sebold once wrote, Men and animals regard each other across a gulf of mutual incomprehension. This is the case here, but during the course of 227 days, they come to a form of recognition. The tiger, in particular, becomes aware that he sees the boy not merely as victim or prey, or even as master, but as another being.
The movie quietly combines various religious traditions to enfold its story in the wonder of life. How remarkable that these two mammals, and the fish beneath them and birds above them, are all here. And when they come to a floating island populated by countless meerkats, what an incredible sequence Lee creates there.
The island raises another question: Is it real? Is this whole story real? I refuse to ask that question. Life of Pi is all real, second by second and minute by minute, and what it finally amounts to is left for every viewer to decide. I have decided it is one of the best films of the year.
Red Dawn opens with a hard-fought high school football game, the day before Spokane, Wash. is interrupted by the thud of bombs. The young gridiron stars of the Wolverines race outside to see enemy aircraft flying overhead in formation, dropping paratroopers from the skies.
This is an alarming sight, but not to worry: The movie reassures us that an invasion by communist North Korea can be vanquished by the members of the team and their girlfriends, using mostly automatic weapons stolen from the North Koreans themselves.
If you're wondering how North Korea can raise enough invaders to attack the Unites States, it may help to understand that the original screenplay for this remake named the invaders as Chinese. After principal photography was completed on this film three years ago and its studio went belly-up, the enemy identity was changed to North Korea by reshooting several scenes, redubbing lots of dialogue and using digital adjustment to change the looks of flags, uniforms and insignia on trucks and tanks. Did this involve a change in ideology in Hollywood? Not really. A marketing genius figured out that China is one of the biggest markets for American movie exports, and North Korea generates unimpressive box-office bucks for Yank product, as the trade papers like to word it.
But back to football. The home-team Wolverines are headed by star player Matt Eckert, whose older brother, Jed, is a Marine just returning from active duty. That's a nifty way to include someone with military training and experience on your side. Jed takes unofficial command as the Wolverines go into action against the invaders. Matt's girlfriend is Erica, a cheerleader, and Toni is a spunky hometown girl who develops a crush on Jed.
The nature of the invasion quickly becomes clear. The North Koreans take over the police department as their headquarters and co-opt the feckless mayor to help them issue pronouncements. His son, Daryl, of course joins the Wolverines, who also include Josh Hutcherson. No mention is made of other Spokane high school teams, so it must be just this one heroic team and its recruits who turn back the invasion.
The story's time frame is confusingly murky. How long does it take the North Koreans to land, import their heavy weapons and vehicles, enlist local traitors and start running things? What is their game plan? Is this a national invasion? How do they plan petrol deliveries? We're unclear about what's happening in the rest of the United States.
The velocity of events picks up considerably, however, in an endless and mindless combat sequence in which the Wolverines prove to be fierce combat troops and the North Koreans are reassuringly incompetent. The kids, even the girlfriends, are adept at handling heavy-duty automatic weapons, even machineguns mounted on top of captured vehicles.
They're also gifted strategists, instinctively occupying the high ground and spraying bullets down upon the hapless enemy forces who are often conveniently lined up in the street below. They achieve all of these things with remarkably little dialogue; mostly they just shout exhortations at one another and eavesdrop on speeches to the population by the enemy leader, Capt. Cho.
I'm not sure I saw any Wolverines actually killed — at least no major characters. I'm sure I must have seen countless North Koreans mowed down, but given the movie's PG-13 rating, the carnage is far from graphic. A closing scene, rousingly patriotic, takes place back on the football field. I think I'm beginning to understand why the Chinese were not reckoned to be a prime market for this film.
It's well known that David Lynch's Mulholland Dr. was assembled from the remains of a cancelled TV series, with the addition of some additional footage filmed later. That may be taken by some viewers as a way to explain the film's fractured structure and lack of continuity. I think it's a delusion to imagine a complete film lurking somewhere in Lynch's mind — a ghostly Director's Cut that exists only in his original intentions. The film is openly dreamlike, and like most dreams it moves uncertainly down a path with many turnings.
It seems to be the dream of Betty, seen in the first shots sprawled on a bed. It continues with the story of how Betty came to Hollywood and how she ended up staying in the apartment of her aunt, but if we are within a dream there is no reason to believe that on a literal level. It's as likely she only dreams of getting off a flight from Ontario to Los Angeles, being wished good luck by the cackling old couple who met her on the plane, and arriving by taxi at the apartment. Dreams cobble their contents from the materials at hand, and although the old folks turn up again at the end of the film their actual existence may be problematic.
The movie seems seductively realistic in several opening scenes however, as an ominous film noir sequence shows a beautiful woman in the back seat of a limousine on Mulholland Drive — that serpentine road that coils along the spine of the hills separating the city from the San Fernando Valley. The limo pulls over, the driver pulls a gun and orders his passenger out of the car, and just then two drag-racing hot rods hurtle into view and one of them strikes the limo, killing the driver and his partner. The stunned woman staggers into some shrubbery and starts to climb down the hill — first crossing Franklin Dr., finally arriving at Sunset. Still hiding in shrubbery, she sees a woman leaving an apartment to get into a taxi, and she sneaks into the apartment and hides under a table.
Who is she? Let's not get ahead of her. The very first moments of the film seemed like a bizarre montage from a jitterbug contest on a1950s TV show, and the hotrods and their passengers visually link with that. But people don't dress like jitterbuggers and drag race on Mulholland at the time of the film, not in now-priceless antique hot rods, and the crash seems to have elements imported from an audition, perhaps, that will later be made much of.
I won't further try your patience with more of this mix-and-match. Dreams need not make sense, I am not Freud, and at this point in the film it's working perfectly well as a film noir. They need not make sense, either. Conventional movie cops turn up, investigate, and disappear for the rest of the film. Betty discovers the woman from Mulholland taking a shower in her aunt's apartment and demands to know who she is. The woman sees a poster of Rita Hayworth in Gilda on the wall and replies, Rita. She claims to have amnesia. Betty now responds with almost startling generosity, deciding to help Rita discover her identity, and in a smooth segue the two women bond. Indeed, before long they're helping each other sneak into apartment #17. Lynch has shifted gears from a film noir to a much more innocent kind of crime story, a Nancy Drew mystery. When they find the decomposing corpse in #17, however, that's a little more detailed than Nancy Drew's typical discoveries.
What I've been doing is demonstrating the way Mulholland Dr. affects a lot of viewers. They start rehearsing the plot to themselves, hoping that if they retrace their steps they can determine where they are and how they got there. This movie doesn't work that way. Each step has a way of being like an open elevator door with no elevator inside.
Unsatisfied by my understanding of the film, I took it to an audience that hadn't failed me for 30 years. At the Conference on World Affairs at the University of Colorado at Boulder, I did my annual routine: Showing a title on Monday afternoon, and then sifting through it a scene at a time, sometimes a shot at a time, for the next four afternoons. It drew a full house, and predictably a lot of readings and interpretations. Yet even my old friend who was forever finding everything to be a version of Homer's Odyssey was uncertain this time.
I gave my usual speech about how you can't take an interpretation to a movie. You have to find it there already. No consensus emerged about what we had found. It was a tribute to Lynch that the movie remained compulsively watchable while refusing to yield to interpretation. The most promising direction we tried was to delineate the boundaries of the dreams(s) and the identities of the dreamer(s).
That was an absorbing exercise, but then consider the series of shots in which the film loses focus and then the women's faces begin to merge. I was reminded of Bergman's Persona, also a film about two women. At a point when one deliberately causes an injury to the other, the film seems to catch on fire in the projector. The screen goes black, and then the film starts again with images from the earliest days of silent film. What is Bergman telling us? Best to start over again? What is Lynch telling us? Best to abandon the illusion that all of this happens to two women, or within two heads?
What about the much-cited lesbian scenes? Dreams? We all have erotic dreams, but they are more likely inspired by desires than experiences, and the people in them may be making unpaid guest appearances. What about the film's material involving auditions? Those could be stock footage in any dream by an actor. The command about which actress to cast? That leads us around to the strange little man in the wheelchair, issuing commands. Would anyone in the film's mainstream have a way of knowing such a figure existed?
And what about the whatever-he-is who lurks behind the diner? He fulfills the underlying purpose of Lynch's most consistent visual strategy in the film. He loves to use slow, sinister sideways tracking shots to gradually peek around corners. There are a lot of those shots in the aunt's apartment. That's also the way we sneak up to peek around the back corner of the diner. When that figure pops into view, the timing is such that you'd swear he knew someone — or the camera — was coming. It's a classic BOO! moment and need not have the slightest relationship to anything else in the film.
David Lynch loves movies, genres, archetypes and obligatory shots. Mulholland Drive employs the conventions of film noir in a pure form. One useful definition of noirs is that they're about characters who have committed a crime or a sin, are immersed with guilt, and fear they're getting what they eserve. Another is that they've done nothing wrong, but it nevertheless certainly appears as if they have.
The second describes Hitchcock's favorite plot, the Innocent Man Wrongly Accused. The first describes the central dilemma of Mulholland Dr. Yet it floats in an uneasy psychic space, never defining who sinned. The film evokes the feeling of noir guilt while never attaching to anything specific. A neat trick. Pure cinema.
Pat is curiously confident and upbeat for a man just released from a mental hospital and under a restraining order from his wife. That's because he's determined to repair the damage he's done to his life and surprise everyone by moving ever onward and upward. His motto is, Excelsior! What stage of bipolar disorder would you guess he's in?
At the top of his priority list is rebuilding his marriage with his wife; after they split, he beat up her new boyfriend, but what's past is past. Pat assures his parents, Pat Sr. and Dolores, that all will be well. They're not so sure. One of the charms of Silver Linings Playbook, the screwy new comedy by David O. Russell, is how Dolores is a sane and caring woman and has had long experience in dealing with compulsive behavior, because her husband is a fanatic fan of the Philadelphia Eagles. Having been banned from the Eagles' stadium for fighting, Pat Sr. now focuses uneasily on his TV set, convinced that the Eagles will win only if his several superstitions are fulfilled.
Pat Jr. in desperation is drawn toward Tiffany, a young widow in the neighborhood. Lawrence appears here much transformed from the woman we saw in Winter's Bone and The Hunger Games. Still only 22, she looks softer, sweeter and somehow prettier than before, yet she plays Tiffany as all edges and elbows, who can understand Pat because she's crazy herself. People call her a slut, and she agrees. She's pissed off about Pat because he continues to obsess about his ex-wife — and also because much of her value to him is that's she's still in contact with the other woman.
In supporting roles, we meet Danny, Pat's fellow patient at the hospital, and Dr. Cliff Patel, his shrink. Danny's worried that Pat's off his meds. Dr. Patel plays an increasingly common type in American movies, the Indian immigrant who seems to embody certain stereotypes and then is revealed to be completely assimilated.
Tiffany thinks she and Pat should have sex. Pat objects. He doesn't want to be unfaithful to his ex-wife. Tiffany's eyes narrow. We realize Pat doesn't have a chance. This all builds up into a classic screwball comedy situation in which two bets are inspired — one involving an Eagles-Cowboys game and the other involving a ballroom dancing contest that Tiffany has forced Pat to join her in with a form of emotional blackmail.
How these bets play out I will, of course, not hint. I will note that Pat, in keeping with family tradition, gets in trouble at the game for fighting. Don't you sometimes wish movies watched other movies? Imagine Pat running into the Patton Oswalt character from Big Fan. How cool would that be?
I love actors. I've been on an almost lifelong journey with Robert De Niro, and feel intimately familiar with him as an actor. Here his work unobtrusively charmed my socks off. He's harmlessly obsessed with the Eagles, gratefully in love with his wife and cluelessly supportive of his son, who he doesn't realize is an apple who has fallen very close to the tree.
One of the ingenious and sort of brave accomplishments of Russell's screenplay is the way it requires both father and son to face and deal with their mental problems and against all odds finds a way to do that through both an Eagles game and a dance contest. We're fully aware of the plot conventions at work here, the wheels and gears churning within the machinery, but with these actors, this velocity and the oblique economy of the dialogue, we realize we don't often see it done this well. Silver Linings Playbook is so good, it could almost be a terrific old classic.
In this 50th year of the James Bond series, with the dismal Quantum of Solace still in our minds, Skyfall triumphantly reinvents 007 in one of the best Bonds ever. This is a full-blooded, joyous, intelligent celebration of a beloved cultural icon, with Daniel Craig taking full possession of a role he earlier played well in Casino Royale, not so well in Quantum -- although it may not have been entirely his fault. Or is it just that he's growing on me? I don't know what I expected. I don't know what I expected in Bond No. 23, but certainly not an experience this invigorating.
The movie's innovations begin in its first shots, which abandon the familiar stalking silhouettes in the iris lens, and hit the ground running. Bond and another agent are in Istanbul, chasing a man who has stolen a crucial hard drive, and after a chase through city streets, 007 is running on top of a train. We know from earlier films that Bond can operate almost anything, but Skyfall incredibly has him commandeer of a giant Caterpillar and continue the chase by crushing a flatcar filled with VW Beetles.
It's the kind of absurd stunt we expect in a Bond movie, but this one relies on something unexpected: a dead-serious M, following the action from MI6 in London and making a fateful decision. After an enemy agent grabs Bond as a human shield, M's other agent, Eve, has both men in her gun sights. The stakes are very high. Take the shot! M commands. Bond seems to die, although since this happens around the 20-minute mark, we're not very surprised that he doesn't.
M begins to compose the obituary of Commander James Bond, and she might as well also be writing her own. Time has passed her by, she's older, and her new boss, Mallory, convenes a public hearing requiring her to defend her tenure. It's time for a generation to be put out to pasture. Even Q and, as it turns out, Miss Moneypenny are practically kids.
M is not quite ready to retire, and Skyfall at last provides a role worthy of Judi Dench, one of the best actors of her generation. She is all but the co-star of the film, with a lot of screen time, poignant dialogue, and a character who is far more complex and sympathetic than we expect in this series. The film is guided by a considerable director, written by the heavyweights Neal Purvis, Robert Wade and John Logan, and delivers not only a terrific Bond but a terrific movie, period. If you haven't seen a 007 for years, this is the time to jump back in.
There's a theory that you can grade the Bonds on the quality of their villains. In Skyfall, this is a cerebral megalomaniac named Silva, played by Javier Bardem, whose unpronounceable Anton Chigurh in No Country for Old Men approached the high-water mark of Hannibal Lecter. Here he plays a bleached blond computer whiz who stole the drive containing the guarded identities of every MI6 agent. Are we supposed to think of Julian Assange?
This is a brand-new Bond with love and respect for the old Bond. This is dramatized during Bond's visit to the weathered Scottish mansion inhabited by Kincade, which has secrets to divulge and continues the movie's rewriting of the character's back story. During the early Bonds, did we ever even ask ourselves about 007's origins in life? Skyfall even produces a moment designed to inspire love in Bond fans: a reappearance of the Aston Martin DB5 from Goldfinger, which remains in good operating condition.
Just as Christopher Nolan gave rebirth to the Batman movies in The Dark Knight, here is James Bond lifted up, dusted off, set back on his feet and ready for another 50 years. And am I completely misguided when I expect to see Miss Moneypenny become a Bond girl in the next film?
Even as I was watching Cloud Atlas the first time, I knew I would need to see it again. Now that I've seen it the second time, I know I'd like to see it a third time — but I no longer believe repeated viewings will solve anything. To borrow Churchill's description of Russia, it is a riddle, wrapped in a mystery, inside an enigma. It fascinates in the moment. It's getting from one moment to the next that is tricky.
Surely this is one of the most ambitious films ever made. The little world of film criticism has been alive with interpretations of it, which propose to explain something that lies outside explanation. Any explanation of a work of art must be found in it, not taken to it. As a film teacher, I was always being told by students that a film by David Lynch, say, or Warner Herzog, was a retelling of the life of Christ, say, or 'Moby Dick.'  My standard reply was: Maybe it's simply the telling of itself.
Yet Cloud Atlas cries out for an explanation, and surely you've noticed that I've been tap-dancing around one. I could tell you that it relates six stories taking place between the years 1849 and 2346. I could tell you that the same actors appear in different roles, playing characters of different races, genders and ages. Some are not even human, but fabricants. I could tell you that the acting and makeup are so effective that often I had no idea if I was looking at Tom Hanks, Halle Berry or Jim Broadbent. I could tell you that, and what help is it?
I could tell you that each segment is a refashioning of the story contained in the previous one. That the same birthmark turns up in every period of time. That a repeated motif is that all lives are connected by a thirst for freedom. That the movie was inspired by the much-loved novel of the same name by David Mitchell. That in the novel, the stories were told in chronological order, and then circled back again from end to beginning. That the movie finds its connections through the reappearances of the same actors in different roles and deliberately refers to one story from within another.
Now are you wiser? I'm treading water. And now could follow a very long paragraph introducing and describing the different characters played by the actors. But you would lose your way all the same, because many of the performances and disguises are so cunningly effective. I could tell you that Halle Berry's work as a mid-1970s investigative reporter works well for me, and the gnarly wisdom of Tom Hanks as an old man telling tales is the most impenetrable.
I despair. I think you will want to see this daring and visionary film, directed by Lana Wachowski, Tom Tykwer and Andy Wachowski. Anywhere you go where movie people gather, it will be discussed. Deep theories will be proposed. Someone will say, I don't know what in the hell I saw. The names of Freud and Jung will come up. And now you expect me to unwrap the mystery from the enigma and present you with a nice shiny riddle?
Sometimes the key to one movie can be suggested by another one. We know that the title refers to early drawings of the shapes and behavior of clouds. Not long ago I saw a Swedish film, Simon and the Oaks, about a day-dreaming boy who formed a bond with an oak tree. In its limbs, he would lie reading books of imagination and then allow his eyes to rest on the clouds overhead. As he read a book about desert wanderers, the clouds seemed to take shape as a ghostly caravan of camels in procession across the sky.
I was never, ever bored by Cloud Atlas. On my second viewing, I gave up any attempt to work out the logical connections between the segments, stories and characters. What was important was that I set my mind free to play. Clouds do not really look like camels or sailing ships or castles in the sky. They are simply a natural process at work. So too, perhaps, are our lives. Because we have minds and clouds do not, we desire freedom. That is the shape the characters in Cloud Atlas take, and how they attempt to direct our thoughts. Any concrete, factual attempt to nail the film down to cold fact, to tell you what it means, is as pointless as trying to build a clockwork orange.
But, oh, what a film this is! And what a demonstration of the magical, dreamlike qualities of the cinema. And what an opportunity for the actors. And what a leap by the directors, who free themselves from the chains of narrative continuity. And then the wisdom of the old man staring into the flames makes perfect sense.
Here are three characters in the multi-ethnic Stockholm underworld, each with his own murky idea of ethical behavior, each with his own personal reason for trying to do the right thing, even if that thing might seem immoral to others — and even, of course, if it is illegal.
This tangle of motivations makes Easy Money one of the most involving of the many first-rate thrillers that have come recently from Scandinavia. It has additional interest because it stars Joel Kinnaman, known to American TV audiences as the star of AMC's The Killing. Kinnaman, who is seamlessly multilingual, has been signed to star in a forthcoming remake of Robocop, and seems on the brink of stardom.
In the movie, he plays Johan Westlund, known as J.W., an impoverished student from a town in the north of Sweden, who feels out of his depth in the snobbish culture of Stockholm's financial wheeler-dealers. But he wants to be accepted by them. He is a gifted student, understands numbers and to impress the upper crust, lies about his family and conceals his poverty. They would be surprised to learn he drives a cab.
The second principal figure is Jorge, who pulls off a daring prison break and arrives desperate at the home of his pregnant sister. Her husband knows all about Jorge's association with the cocaine business and has banned him from their home, but the sister lets him stay a few days. His enemies find him, and he is beaten by men working for the Serbian crime lord Radovan.
The third protagonist is Mrado, who becomes more sympathetic as we learn he was beaten as a child and is determined at all costs to shelter his little daughter, Lovisa, from the brutality he still experiences in his own life.
These three become involved in a labyrinth of dealings with the underworld. After Jorge is beaten, J.W. picks him up in his cab, has sympathy and takes him back to his tiny students' dorm room. It is from here that J.W., always particular about his appearance, always well-dressed, stages his forays into the world of the wealthy. As a cab driver, he often works for two Arab criminals, Abdulkarim and Mahmoud. Now he and Jorge become involved in their scheme to steal a shipment of cocaine the Serbs are bringing in from Germany.
Oh, it grows deeper. At the same time, the financial whiz J.W. is recruited by the Serbs for his money-laundering skills and intrigues them with the idea of purchasing a nearly bankrupt bank and using it as a front. So now he's working both for and against the Serbs.
If this sounds complex, it is. One of the strengths of Daniel Espinosa's film is how much clarity he brings to his story. His underlying interest is always in the motivations of his leading characters. In many crime movies, the characters are inspired by simple greed. Here we have J.W. trying to climb out of poverty and provincial obscurity; Jorge hoping to redeem himself in the eyes of his sister, and Mrado trying to construct a secure future for his daughter.
Always present, if not precisely stated, is that for all three of these outsiders, crime is the only avenue they can imagine to escape from their situation and become independent. The film makes it clear that Sweden is not quite the egalitarian state we imagine, but a nation where money, family and class still function as they do anywhere else. J.W. becomes keenly aware of this after falling in love with Sophie, a rich, young socialite. She loves him, too — but thinks he is the son of a diplomat. He knows clearly that if she saw him driving cab, sheltering an escaped prisoner in his dorm room and plotting to intercept a shipment of cocaine, her love would evaporate.
What is it about Scandinavia that has inspired such a stream of top-rate thrillers? Its novelists have been fascinated by the crime genre. What remains consistent in the thrillers from this part of the world is they remain devoted to characters and their inner motivations. The people in these movies are not simply avatars moving through chases and shootouts. How novel.
When purchased in 2007 by Trump, the land was a conservation area, with sand dunes 4,000 years old and a mixture of ocean-shore environments. We've had tremendous support from the environmentalists, Trump says to a TV interviewer, which is a bald-faced lie. We see spokesmen for U.K. environmental organizations who are bitterly opposed, and indeed his building permit was turned down by the local council before being restored by the Scottish Parliament on the grounds that it would bring jobs to the sparsely populated area.
But that isn't what's most fascinating about Anthony Baxter's one-man indie documentary. It's Donald Trump's almost joyous rudeness. The Donald loves playing a bad guy. One of his targets in the project are a few small farm homes that he fears would spoil the view of his luxury hotel guests. Having stayed at hotels in the area, I found the sight of farms added to my pleasure.
But listen to Trump describe Michael Forbes, a man who has refused to sell his strategically located land to the robber baron: The man lives in a pig sty. He lives in garbage. He's a pig. Say what? Has Trump ever visited the Forbes farm or been inside his home? Not bloody likely. What we see is a farm, with machinery, outbuildings, chickens, ponies and no pigs. I imagine Trump's idea of beauty is the antiseptic tackiness of the tinfoil towers he erects around the world.
Trump's operation moves with cruel efficiency. Tons of sand are bulldozed from a virgin beach and piled up to create a small mountain blocking Forbes' view. His water and electricity are cut off, and when he visits the Trump site office, he is dismissed curtly. The local police later arrest Baxter and hold him in jail for four hours, on general principles. From what we see, they were unprovoked.
We visit and meet Forbes, whose meticulously trimmed mustache alone should raise doubts about his piggish existence — all right, I'll say it — especially in contrast to what David Letterman describes as the thing that lives on Donald Trump's head. We also visit Susan Munro, who shows old movies of her father, a fisherman who lived on the very same spot, and David Milne, another indignant local. Local outrage inspires a protest march on the area. There's an uproar when a local university grants Trump an honorary degree; the school's former principal returns his own degree in protest. Trump proudly marches in with two hired bagpipers who hilariously accompany him everywhere he goes.
The underlying message is that if you are rich and powerful enough, you can run roughshod over tradition and private property rights and buy your place at the table. One 18-hole course of Trump's new development opened in July, but construction on the 450-room hotel has been halted. Trump's reason for the delay is priceless: He threatened to move the development elsewhere because the windmills of an offshore wind farm will spoil the view of his guests. He announced his decision at about the same time he commenced his bid for the U.S. presidential nomination.
Do the math. To tee up at the Trump course will cost around $310, about the same as the world's first and most famous golf course, the Old Course in nearby St. Andrews. How many rounds of golf do you need to sell to pay for a luxury hotel? Can he make a go of the project without the hotel? Construction remains on hold.
In medieval times, the nobility enjoyed something called droit du seigneur, their right to deflower their serfs' virgin daughters before their marriage. These days the nobility has been replaced by billionaire bullies, who continue to screw us serfs.
It's the same the world over. A Hollywood production comes to town, and the locals all turn movie crazy. When a little picture named Prancer came to Three Oaks, Mich., I was sitting in the bar and overheard one bearded regular confide in his friend, See that guy? He's assistant makeup.
As in Michigan, so in Iran. At the height of the 1979 Iranian hostage crisis, with yellow ribbons tied around half the old oak trees in America, a CIA agent and a couple of Hollywood professionals dreamed up a cockamamie scheme to free six Americans who had found refuge in the Canadian embassy. Their existence had to remain a secret to protect Canada's diplomatic status.
Enter the CIA extractor Tony Mendez, a producer named Lester Siegel and a makeup man named John Chambers. Chambers has a brainstorm: He and Siegel would fabricate a fake sci-fi thriller named Argo. They would commission a screenplay, pay for storyboards, and buy a big ad in Variety. Mendez would fly alone into Tehran and train the six Americans to impersonate Hollywood pros — the cinematographer and so on.
Their cover: They need desert locations for their movie, which would vaguely resemble Star Wars. They would tell the Iranians the six people were Canadians who were scouting locations and now need to fly back to North America. One of the most enchanting scenes has Mendez showing the sci-fi storyboards to Iranian authorities, who try their best to conceal what movie buffs they are. At the end of the scene, when Mendez tells them you can keep em, they're like kids being given an E.T. poster by Steven Spielberg.
This preposterous scheme is based on fact. Yes, it is. Countless movies are inspired by real events, but this one truly took place. The extraction of the six Americans remained top secret for 18 years. They all returned safely to America. Argo, needless to say, was never filmed.
Ben Affleck not only stars in but also directs, and Argo, the real movie about the fake movie, is both spellbinding and surprisingly funny. Many of the laughs come from the Hollywood guys played by Goodman and Arkin, although to be sure, as they set up a fake production office and hold meetings poolside at the Beverly Hills Hotel, they aren't in danger like their crew members in Iran.
Key supporting roles are filled by Bryan Cranston, as the CIA chief who green-lights the scheme, and Victor Garber, as the Canadian ambassador who at great risk opens his embassy's doors to the secret guests. Affleck is brilliant at choreographing the step-by-step risks that the team take in exiting Tehran, and Argo has cliff-hanging moments when the whole delicate plan seems likely to split at the seams.
The craft in this film is rare. It is so easy to manufacture a thriller from chases and gunfire, and so very hard to fine-tune it out of exquisite timing and a plot that's so clear to us we wonder why it isn't obvious to the Iranians. After all, who in their right mind would believe a space opera was being filmed in Iran during the hostage crisis? Just about everyone, it turns out. Hooray for Hollywood.
Some women sell their bodies out of need. Some because they like the money or the independence. Angelina, the 18-year-old subject of About Cherry, is the first I've encountered who does it out of absentmindedness and a vague narcissism. Here is a movie that suggests prostitution is something that just sort of happens to you, like Lyme disease.
Angelina is a Long Beach teenager who lives unhappily with an alcoholic mother and works in a Laundromat, doing other people's dirty laundry. Her boyfriend, a drummer in a rock band, suggests she can pick up a few hundred bucks by posing for nude photos. Fun fact: Boyfriends in rock bands are almost always drummers, because it's easier for them to make eye contact than the other musicians.
Angelina takes the job, loses her laundry and seems about as affected as if a friend had snapped her with an iPhone. When the boyfriend sees the photos and is disturbed, she leaves Long Beach and travels to San Francisco with her BFF Andrew, who she keeps around as sort of a mascot. She pets him, feeds him and lets him sleep in her bed. Some might find this a cruel sexual temptation. I suspect Angelina is so dim-witted, she doesn't notice when she's nude, and it never occurs to her that Andrew may have a crush.
In San Francisco, we follow her up, or down, the ladder of the porn industry, as she progresses passively from nude to girl-girl to boy-girl. The money gets better. It doesn't occur to her that she has become a prostitute. She has sex with strangers for money, but protests this is my job. A wise old man in London named Henry Togna once suggested to me that his neighbor, the Duchess of Duke Street, among her many other accomplishments, ran a bordello. Henry! his wife protested. You make her sound like a madam! His reply: Sex for cash, m'dear. That's my definition.
Angelina, now known professionally as Cherry, begins to work with Margaret, a lesbian director who takes one look at her through the viewfinder and experiences true lust. You may remember Heather Graham as Roller Girl in Boogie Nights. It's heartening to see that she has had such professional success.
In a sex club, Angelina meets a slick-taking lawyer named Francis, who seems sort of nice until he turns her on to cocaine. The introduction of drugs is usually a crucial turning point in such stories, driving the heroine into degradation. In Angelina's case, she seems to like cocaine well enough, but it doesn't seem to make much of an impression. Here is a girl who needs to pay more attention.
There is a subplot you'll miss if you blink. Margaret has a girlfriend of several years named Jillian, who grows jealous of Angelina, throws a tantrum and walks out. This event has no emotional weight. None of the romantic liaisons convey any conviction — save perhaps poor Andrew's celibate crush on Angelina, which now drives him to masturbate while looking at her hard-core videos. She walks in on him while he's doing that, explodes in anger and screams: You love me — just not enough to jerk off to somebody else!
Now this is a line of dialogue that needs a profound book written about it. Would she be less jealous if he had been watching porn starring somebody else? Why? Given her line of work, shouldn't she be complimented that with all the porn out there, he chose her? Angelina seems to be disconnected from her body, her self, her work and its consequences. That's one reason About Cherry is such an oddly passive and distant film. If this poor sap of a girl has no other reason to sell herself, shouldn't she at least care about the money? She doesn't even seem to notice it much, except that it grows larger.
Prostitution can be a fascinating occupation, allowing personal and financial independence and the kind of entre into the lives of strangers ordinarily available only to doctors, police officers, clergymen and psychiatrists. Prostitutes have inspired some of the most unforgettable characters in fiction. As for all of its effect on Angelina, she might as well have saved herself the wear and tear and stayed in the laundry.
All of my previous selves still survive somewhere inside of me, and my previous adolescent would have loved The Perks of Being a Wallflower. The movie has received glowing reviews, and some snarky ones that seem to have been written by previous adults. The film is about an alienated high-school freshman who sees himself as a chronic outsider, and then is befriended by a group of older kids who embrace their non-conformist status.
The movie confirms one of my convictions: If you are too popular in high school, you may become so fond of the feeling that you never find out who you really are. The film is based on Stephen Chbosky's best-selling young-adult novel, which was published in 1999 and is now on many shelves next to The Catcher in the Rye. It offers the rare pleasure of an author directing his own book, and doing it well. No one who loves the book will complain about the movie, and especially not about its near-ideal casting.
The story, set in the early 1990s, tells the story of Charlie, who begins it as a series of letters to a friend. He enters high school tremulously and without confidence, and is faced on his first day by that great universal freshman crisis: Which table in the lunchroom will they let me sit at? Discouraged at several tables, he's welcomed by two smart and sympathetic seniors.
They are Sam and Patrick, played by Emma Watson in her own coming-of-age role after the Harry Potter movies, and Ezra Miller, who was remarkable as an alienated teenager in We Need to Talk About Kevin. Charlie makes the mistake of assuming they are a couple, and Sam's laughter corrects him; actually, they're half-siblings. Charlie is on the edge of outgrowing his depression and dorkdom, and is eerily likable in his closed-off way. One of the key players in his life is the dead aunt he often has imaginary meetings with.
Patrick is tall, gangly and gay; Sam is friendly and lovable. Charlie gets a quick crush on her, but she explains she has a b.f. and encourages his friendship. Through them, he meets the quasi-punk Mary Elizabeth, who definitely is interested in dating him, and a pothead named Bob, who nudges Charlie toward adventures most teenagers have once in life, and few should have twice.
We learn a lot about their high school crowd by finding out they're instrumental in the local midnight showings of The Rocky Horror Picture Show. When Charlie is unexpectedly pressed into service playing a key role one night during their performance, it provides him with a turning point that may be contrived but is certainly entertaining.
Their crowd is artsy, outsider, non-conformist. They become the influence that rescues Charlie from his deep insecurity and his depression over the suicide of a friend; they teach him it's OK to be who he is. In his first year, he learns a little, very tentatively, about sex, drinking and drugs, and a lot about friendship.
He's also guided by Mr. Anderson, his English teacher, who steers him toward seminal books including, yes, The Catcher in the Rye. Why is it that English, drama and music teachers are most often recalled as our mentors and inspirations? Maybe because artists are rarely members of the popular crowd.
We tend to identify with the leading character of a film, even if he is a heartless bastard. Few films illustrate this curiosity better than Nicholas Jarecki's Arbitrage, and few actors might have been better at making it work than Richard Gere. Here is man involved in a multimillion-dollar fraud, who cheats on his wife, tries to cover up the death of his mistress and would throw his own daughter under a bus. Yet we are tense with suspense while watching him try to get away with it.
Gere has always been an actor good at suggesting secrets under the surface. Improbably handsome, he has aged here into the embodiment of a Wall Street lion, worth billions, charming, generous, honored and a fraud right down to his bones. He plays Robert Miller, whose face must have beamed reassuringly from the covers of many magazines.
As the story opens, he's involved in the merger of his venture capital empire and has hidden $400 million in debt not only from the investors but even from his daughter, Brooke. She is the CFO of his empire. Young, smart, she doesn't suspect her father has cooked the books. If the deception is revealed, she'll be hung out to dry. We're left with memories of Bernie Madoff's associates and family members. Both Madoff and Miller, who in many ways is inspired by him, commanded trust, affection and respect from many who should have looked closer.
Robert Miller has another problem, a high-maintenance mistress named Julie Cote, who has opened an art gallery. Miller is the kind of man who requires a prestigious lover even if she must remain a secret. His wife, Ellen, knows he plays around and accepts that as one of the rules of the game. Classy and well-maintained, she's the kind of corporate wife who must have understood the Supreme Court decision that a corporation is a person.
Julie knows how to push Miller's buttons. Very late one night, he is driving her somewhere as a favor when he dozes off, the car crashes, and she is killed. He thinks to make a cell call, thinks better, walks away from the crash in some pain and uses a pay phone to call Jimmy Grant, the son of a former chauffeur for whom Miller did personal favors.
Grant comes to the rescue, making him a witness after the fact. Miller has internal pain but ignores it, somehow holds himself together, projects his usual sleek confidence and continues his juggling act with the business deal. But Michael Bryer, a scruffy police detective, investigates the accident scene and realizes that something doesn't feel right. To Miller's surprise, he turns up to question him. Roth projects indifferent chatty curiosity that conceals menace.
We may have seen elements of this scenario before, but the young writer-director Nicholas Jarecki, making his first feature, proves himself a master craftsman with a core of moral indignation. He knows how to make a gripping thriller, so well-constructed I felt urgently involved. Arbitrage is an example of good writing and sound construction at the service of plausible characters. It tells a story rather than relying on third-act action. It is in a classic tradition.
Hitchcock called his most familiar subject The Innocent Man Wrongly Accused. Jarecki pumps up the pressure here by giving us a Guilty Man Accurately Accused, and that's what makes the film so ingeniously involving.
We can't help identifying with the protagonist. It's coded in our moviegoing DNA. Yet we watch in horror as Miller is willing to betray anyone — Jimmy Grant, his daughter, his wife — to win at any price. This film, especially its ending, literally could not have been released under the old Production Code.
It represents a radical revision of traditional values. It is an attack on new American mentality that values wealth above morality. Many of us may regard Robert Miller as an example of financial executives who knowingly sell worthless investments to people who trust them and then bet against them themselves. This was one of the Wall Street crimes that brought about the 2008 collapse. Charges were never filed against those thieves. They're still at work.
Arbitrage is not only a great thriller, but a convincing demonstration about how the very rich can get away with murder.
Viewing Hiyao Miyazaki's Spirited Away for the third time, I was struck by a quality between generosity and love. On earlier viewings I was caught up by the boundless imagination of the story. This time I began to focus on the elements in the picture that didn't need to be there. Animation is a painstaking process, and there is a tendency to simplify its visual elements. Miyazaki, in contrast, offers complexity. His backgrounds are rich in detail, his canvas embraces space liberally, and it is all drawn with meticulous attention. We may not pay much conscious attention to the corners of the frame, but we know they are there, and they reinforce the remarkable precision of his fantasy worlds.
Spirited Away is surely one of the finest of all animated films, and it has its foundation in the traditional bedrock of animation, which is frame-by-frame drawing. Miyazaki began his career in that style, but he is a realist and has permitted the use of computers for some of the busywork. But he personally draws thousands of frames by hand. We take handmade cell animation and digitize it in order to enrich the visual look, he told me in 2002, but everything starts with the human hand drawing.
Consider a scene in Spirited Away where his young heroine stands on a bridge leading away from the magical bathhouse in which much of the movie is set. The central action and necessary characters supply all that is actually needed, but watching from the windows and balconies of the bathhouse are many of its occupants. It would be easier to suggest them as vaguely moving presences, but Miyazaki takes care to include many figures we recognize. All of them are in motion. And it isn't the repetitive motion of much animation, in which the only idea is simply to show a figure moving. It is realistic, changing, detailed motion.
Most people watching the movie will simply read those areas of the screen as movement. But if we happen to look, things are really happening there. That's what I mean by generosity and love. Mikayazi and his colleagues care enough to lavish as much energy on the less significant parts of the frame. Notice how much of the bathhouse you can see. It would have been quicker and easier to show just a bridge and a doorway. But Miyazaki gives his bathhouse his complexity of a real place, which possesses attributes whether or not the immediate story requires them.
The story of Spirited Away has been populated with limitless creativity. Has any film ever contained more different kinds of beings that we have never seen anywhere before? Miyazaki's imagination never rests. There is a scene where the heroine and her companion get off a train in the middle of a swamp. In the distant forest they see a light approaching. This turns out to be an old-fashioned light pole that is hopping along on one foot. It bows to them, turns, and lights the way on the path they must take. When they arrive at a cottage, it dutifully hangs itself above the gate. The living light pole is not necessary. It is a gift from Miyazaki.
His story involves a 10-year-old girl named Chihiro, who isn't one of those cheerful little automatons that populate many animated films. She is described by many critics as sullen. Yes, and impatient and impetuous, as she's stuck in the back seat during a long drive to a house her parents want to examine. Her father loses the way in a dark forest, and the road seems to end at the entrance to a tunnel. Investigating it, they find it leads to an abandoned amusement park. But at dusk, some of the shops seem to reopen, especially a food shop whose fragrances steam into the cool air. Her parents fall eagerly upon the counter jammed with food, and stuff their mouths. Chihiro is stubborn and says she isn't hungry. Her parents eat so much they double or triple in size. They eat like pigs, and they become pigs. These aren't the parents of American animation, but parents who can do things that frighten a child.
The amusement park leads to a gigantic floating bathhouse, whose turrets and windows and ledges and ornamentation pile endlessly upon themselves. A friendly boy warns her to return, but she is too late, and the bathhouse casts off from the shore. Chihiro ventures inside, and finds a world of infinite variety. She cannot find her way out again. The boy says everyone must have a job, and sends her to Kamaji, an old bearded man with eight elongated limbs, who runs the boiler room. He and a young girl advise her to apply to Yubaba, who owns the bathhouse. This is a fearsome old witch who exhales plumes of smoke and a cackling laugh.
This is the beginning of an extraordinary adventure. Chihiro will meet no more humans in the bathhouse. She will be placed under a spell by Yubaba, who steals her name and gives her a new one, Sen. Unless she can get her old name back again, she can never leave. One confusing space opens onto another in the bathhouse, whose population is a limitless variety of bizarre life-forms. There are little fuzzy black balls with two eyeballs, who steal Sen's shoes. Looming semi-transparent No Faces, who wear masks over their ghostly shrouds. Three extraordinary heads without bodies, who hop about looking angry, and resemble caricatures of Karl Marx. There is a malodorous heap of black slime, a river creature whose body has sopped up piles of pollution. Shape-shifting, so common in Japanese fantasy, takes place here, and the boy who first befriended her is revealed as a lithe sea dragon with fierce fangs.
Sen makes her way through this world, befriended by some, shunned by others, threatened by Yubaba, learning as she goes. She never becomes a nice girl, but her pluck and determination win our affection. She becomes determined to regain her name and return to the mainland on a daily train. She wants to find her parents again.
Miyazaki says he made the film specifically for 10-year-old girls. That is why it plays so powerfully for adult viewers. Movies made for everybody are actually made for nobody in particular. Movies about specific characters in a detailed world are spellbinding because they make no attempt to cater to us; they are defiantly, triumphantly, themselves. As I watched the film again, I was spellbound as much as by any film I consider great. That helps explain why Spirited Away grossed more than Titanic in Japan, and was the first foreign film in history to open in the U. S. having already made more than $200 million.
I was so fortunate to meet Miyazaki at the 2002 Toronto film festival. I told him I love the gratuitous motion in his films; instead of every movement being dictated by the story, sometimes people will just sit for a moment, or sigh, or gaze at a running stream, or do something extra, not to advance the story but only to give the sense of time and place and who they are.
We have a word for that in Japanese, he said. It's called 'ma.' Emptiness. It's there intentionally. He clapped his hands three or four times. The time in between my clapping is 'ma.' If you just have non-stop action with no breathing space at all, it's just busyness.
I think that helps explain why Miyazaki's films are more absorbing than the frantic action in a lot of American animation. The people who make the movies are scared of silence he said, so they want to paper and plaster it over, he said. They're worried that the audience will get bored. But just because it's 80 percent intense all the time doesn't mean the kids are going to bless you with their concentration. What really matters is the underlying emotions--that you never let go of those.
What my friends and I have been trying to do since the 1970's is to try and quiet things down a little bit; don't just bombard them with noise and distraction. And to follow the path of children's emotions and feelings as we make a film. If you stay true to joy and astonishment and empathy you don't have to have violence and you don't have to have action. They'll follow you. This is our principle.
He said he has been amused to see a lot of animation in live-action superhero movies. In a way, live action is becoming part of that whole soup called animation. Animation has become a word that encompasses so much, and my animation is just a little tiny dot over in the corner. It's plenty for me.
It's plenty for me, too.
We live in an age of speed-up, which may explain why the Spider-Man franchise feels the need for a reboot only 10 years after its first film, and five years after the most recent one. In its broad strokes, The Amazing Spider-Man is a remake of Sam Raimi's Spider-Man, but it's not the broad strokes we care about. This is a more thoughtful film, and its action scenes are easier to follow in space and time. If we didn't really need to be told Spidey's origin story again, at least it's done with more detail and provides better reasons for why Peter Parker throws himself into his superhero role.
Parker is played by Andrew Garfield, who at 28 looks too old to be in high school, but then movie teenagers usually do. His key quality is likability, which he shares with his predecessor, Tobey Maguire. Gwen, his classmate and girlfriend, is a well-grounded female who needs some persuasion to bond with Peter. That's partly because Garfield's take on Spidey is sometimes a few strands short of a web. He's not above showoff stunts in high school and takes chances with his newfound superpowers. This is the first Spider-Man who can leap off a skyscraper and make us wonder if he has a plan in mind.
The origin story takes at least an hour to tell, and I enjoyed that, because it seems to me that CGI superhero films often go on autopilot during their big action climaxes. We learn how Peter lost his parents and came into the care of Aunt May and Uncle Ben. Finding his dad's old-fashioned briefcase in the attic, Peter comes across brilliant scientific work about cross-species interbreeding, and that leads him to the Manhattan skyscraper of Oscorp, your typical comic-book mega-corporation with a madman at the top.
The screwball scientist is his dad's old partner, Dr. Curt Connors. He has lost his right arm and obsesses about regenerating it by injecting himself with the genes of lizards, which can replace lost limbs. Connors overdoses on lizard juice and expands into the hyper-violent Lizard, who goes on rampages and knocks cars off bridges with its tail.
Meanwhile of course the cops blame a midtown trail of destruction on Spider-Man, and wouldn't you know that Gwen's father is police chief Stacy. This sets up various close calls and reconciliations, and the movie's single best action scene, when Spidey rescues a boy from a burning car dangling from a bridge. The kid is able to assist in his own rescue after putting on Spidey's face mask; I doubt the mask has magical powers, but simply provides a psychological boost.
That also may help explain why Peter/Spider-Man spends so much time not wearing the mask. That, and the fact that Andrew Garfield is very good-looking, and the mask reminds me of Hellboy wearing a screen door.
The best of all the Spider-Man movies remains Raimi's Spider-Man 2, with the best of the series' villains, Doc Ock. This film is probably the second best. The Lizard is not especially inspired and seems limited to the dramatic range of a Godzilla. Luckily, the climactic battle atop the Oscorp Tower is intercut with parallel action involving the plucky Gwen, who risks her life in an attempt to immunize all New Yorkers from becoming lizards. Director Marc Webb is aware that effective CGI action must be slow enough to be comprehensible, and although the Lizard sometimes thrashes about in a rage, Spidey's action makes sense.
A technological footnote: Peter/Spidey depends on cell phones, which save the day when Spidey urges Gwen to — quick! — find the blue serum! Peter Parker is still a photographer; although we see a front page proving the Daily Bugle is still being published, Peter doesn't seem to free-lance for it anymore; no doubt he's been downsized. The credit cookies promise a sequel, and I suppose by the time they make it, Peter will have switched over to making videos for YouTube.
The funniest movie character so far this year is a stuffed teddy bear. And the best comedy screenplay so far is Ted, the saga of the bear's friendship with a 35-year-old manchild. I know; this also was hard for me to believe. After memories of Mel Gibson's bond with a sock puppet, Ted was not high on the list of movies I was impatient to see.
The opening scenes find the right tone. A treacly narrator describes a Christmas that reminds us of a A Christmas Story, except for the jolts of four-letter words and anti-PC one-liners. We meet young John Bennett, the most unpopular kid in the neighborhood, so disliked that while a Jewish kid is being beaten up, John feels envious.
All young John wants is a true friend for life. For Christmas, his parents give him an enormous teddy bear the size of a first grader, and that night under the sheets with a flashlight, John asks Teddy to be his real and true forever friend. Teddy comes to life and agrees.
The miracle of a walking, talking teddy bear of course makes the little stuffed creature an overnight celebrity, and he appears on the Carson show. But his fame fades, and he settles in as John's roommate for life. Years pass. Teddy is now a little frayed, and John, at 35, has a counter job at a rental car agency. Against all odds, he also has a fragrant girlfriend named Lori Collins, who has been waiting four years for a marriage proposal.
John and Ted lead an Animal House-like existence, inhaling wholesale quantities of weed and recalling their early years as Flash Gordon fans. American movies have recently featured a lot of male characters who are victims of arrested adolescence, but few who have resisted growing up more successfully than John.
The laughs in Ted come largely through the teddy bear's dialogue. With an edgy Beantown accent and a potty mouth, Ted insults and offends everyone he comes into contact with, and sees Lori as a threat to his friendship with John. This despite his own pastimes, which include drugs, hookers, and as we later discover, a torrid early 1990s affair with absolutely the last female vocalist you could imagine having sex with a teddy bear — and I mean the last.
The movie was co-written and directed by Seth MacFarlane, who also provides Ted's voice and gives himself the same freedom he has in animation. The bear itself is a CGI creation, striking a reasonable balance between the agility of a sexual athlete and the clumsiness of Pooh. It appears that Ted is stuffed with cotton wool and feels no pain when an ear is ripped off, but he behaves as a living, breathing best buddy.
The plot of Ted is fairly standard but greatly embellished by MacFarlane's ability to establish comic situations and keep them building. One crucial scene occurs when Ted persuades John to leave Lori at a party and come to Ted's own party, where their childhood hero has turned up. This is Sam J. Jones, star of the 1980 movie Flash Gordon, who in middle age has become a party animal. How this situation ends up with an enraged duck attacking Ted you will have to discover for yourself.
There's also peril involving Donny, a creepy dad who as a child passionately wanted Ted to be his own teddy, and his pudgy spoiled son, who wants Ted now. Their desire is pitched at such a perverse level that it approaches teddy-bear predation.
What's remarkable about Ted is that it doesn't run out of steam. MacFarlane seems unwilling to stop after the first payoff of a scene. He keeps embellishing. In Ted, he has an inexhaustible source of socially obnoxious behavior and language, and it's uncanny the way a teddy bear can get away with doing and saying things that we wouldn't necessarily accept from a human character. This is partly because Ted is a stand-up insult comedian trapped inside the body of a teddy bear.
I must end on a note of warning. Ted is not merely an R-rated movie, but a very R-rated movie — for crude and sexual content, pervasive language and some drug use, according to the MPAA, and what they mean by some is hard to figure, because it could hardly contain more. No matter how much kids want to see the teddy bear movie in the ads on TV, steer them to Brave. Trust me on this.
Abraham Lincoln: Vampire Hunter is without a doubt the best film we are ever likely to see on the subject — unless there is a sequel, which is unlikely, because at the end, the Lincolns are on their way to the theater. It's also a more entertaining movie than I remotely expected. Yes, Reader, I went expecting to sneer.
The story opens with young Abe witnessing the murder of his mother by a vampire. He swears vengeance, and some years later is lucky to be getting drunk while standing at a bar next to Henry Sturgess, who coaches him on vampire-killing and explains that it is a high calling, requiring great dedication and avoiding distractions like marriage.
There's an early scene in which Lincoln tries to shoot a vampire, but that won't work because they're already dead. Then whatever can he do? Well, he tells Henry, I used to be pretty good at rail-splitting… This line drew only a few chuckles from the audience, because the movie cautiously avoids any attempt to seem funny.
Lincoln's weapon of choice becomes an axe with a silver blade, which he learns to spin like a drum major's baton. That he carries this axe with him much of the time may strike some as peculiar. I was reminded uncannily of Buford Pusser, walking tall and carrying a big stick.
Against Henry's advice, Lincoln marries Mary Todd, and the story moves quickly to his days in the White House, where he discovers that the vampires are fighting on the side of the South. This seems odd, since they should be equal opportunity bloodsuckers, but there you have it. Still with him his childhood friend Will Johnson, a free black man whose mistreatment helped form Lincoln's hatred of slavery. Also still at his side is Joshua Speed, who hired him in his Springfield general store; Johnson and Speed join Lincoln in Civil War strategy sessions and are his principal advisers, roles overlooked by history.
The film, directed by Timur Bekmambetov and written by Seth Grahame-Smith, based on his novel, handles all these matters with an admirable seriousness, which may be the only way they could possibly work. The performances are earnest and sincere, and even villains like Adam, the American leader of the Vampire Nation, doesn't spit or snarl over much. It regrettably introduces but does not explain Vadoma, a statuesque woman who is several decades ahead of time in her taste for leather fetish wear. Are vampires kinky? I didn't know.
Although we do not attend Abraham Lincoln: Vampire Hunter in search of a history lesson, there's one glitch I cannot overlook. In the first day of fighting at Gettysburg, the Union sustains a defeat so crushing that Lincoln is tempted to surrender. This is because the Confederate troops, all vampires, are invulnerable to lead bullets, cannon fire and steel blades, and have an alarming way of disappearing and rematerializing. Over breakfast, Lincoln confides his despair to his wife and says conventional weapons are of no more use against them than — why — than this fork! As he stares at it, he realizes it is silver, and vampires can be killed by silver weapons, as he has proved with his axe-twirling.
Now try not to focus too much on the timeline. After his realization, Lincoln mobilizes all resources to gather wagonloads of silver in Washington, melt it, and manufacture silver bayonets, bullets and cannon balls. Then we see him, Johnson and Speed on board a weapons train en route to Gettysburg. It is night again, so apparently all of this took less than a day.
Never mind. What comes now is a genuinely thrilling action sequence in which the vampires battle with Lincoln and his friends on top of the speeding train, which hurtles toward a high wooden bridge that has been set alight by the sinister Vadoma. This sequence is preposterous and yet exciting, using skillful editing and special effects. Somehow Benjamin Walker and his co-stars here are even convincing — well, as convincing as such goofiness could possibly be.
Abraham Lincoln: Vampire Hunter has nothing useful to observe about Abraham Lincoln, slavery, the Civil War or much of anything else. Blink and you may miss the detail that Harriet Tubman's Underground Railway essentially won the war for the North. But the film doesn't promise insights on such subjects. What it achieves is a surprisingly good job of doing justice to its title, and treating Lincoln with as much gravity as we can expect, under the circumstances.
Ridley Scott's Prometheus is a magnificent science-fiction film, all the more intriguing because it raises questions about the origin of human life and doesn't have the answers. It's in the classic tradition of golden age sci-fi, echoing Scott's Alien, but creating a world of its own. I'm a pushover for material like this; it's a seamless blend of story, special effects and pitch-perfect casting, filmed in sane, effective 3-D that doesn't distract.
A scene at the outset shows a world with apparently only one animal being, a pale humanoid who stalks a high ridge surrounded by spectacular scenery. This person eats something that causes painful vomiting and rapid body decay. The vomit is followed into flowing water, where it seems to morph into living cellular structures. Where is this place? Is it Earth? Who is the being, and why is it alone and naked? Is the scene a visualization of the theory that life first arrived on Earth from outer space?
Cut to a human spaceship in the year 2093, qualifying Prometheus for a flash-forward spanning more years than the opening of 2001. The trillion-dollar ship Prometheus is en route to a distant world, which seems pointed to in prehistoric cave paintings. There's reason to believe human life may have originated there. It's an Earth-sized moon orbiting a giant planet, and at first it seems a disappointment: no growing things, unbreathable atmosphere. But the crew notices straight lines on the surface, and as we all know, nature makes no straight lines.
The lines lead to a vast dome or pyramid, and the film will mostly take place inside the dome and the Prometheus. But let's put the plot on hold and introduce two of the crew members: Elizabeth Shaw wears a cross around her neck and believes life ultimately had a divine origin. Her boyfriend, Charlie Holloway, accuses her, a scientist, of dismissing centuries of Darwinism. What they find in the pyramid leaves the question open. Alien humanoids, in suspended animation, incredibly have DNA that's a perfect match for our own. So they could somehow have brought life to Earth — but why? And from this moon where they slumber inside their pyramid, or from another planet around a distant star? Why did they stop here? What are they waiting for?
The film then develops horror scenes comparable to Alien, although it depends more on action and weaponry than that film's use of shadows and silence. For me, the most spellbinding scenes involve the crew members exploring the passages and caverns inside the pyramid, obviously unvisited in aeons, and their experiences with some of the hibernating alien beings. One of the key members of this crew is David, an android, who knows or can figure out more or less everything, even alien languages, and is sort of a walking, talking, utterly fearless HAL 9000.
The alien race in Prometheus shares a body characteristic that reminds me of Alien and countless films since: Elements can detach from them and enter into other bodies as hostile parasites. This leads to an astonishing sequence in which Elizabeth, alone on the ship, discovers she is pregnant with an alien Something and somehow finds the will to control a robot surgery device that removes it. Her later showdown with a waning oxygen supply shows equal resourcefulness; Noomi Rapace continues here the tradition of awesome feminine strength begun by Sigourney Weaver in Alien.
Another strong woman is on board, Meredith Vickers, a representative of the corporation that privately financed the Prometheus. She treats the others like her employees, which they are, and believes she always speaks for the company's wishes. The ship's captain, Janek, makes no pretensions of scientific expertise like the others but is a no-nonsense working pilot. Janek has the most interesting evolution, from the irreverent hipster in his first scenes into a man with the ability to intuit the truth about what he's seeing.
The most tantalizing element is how it plays with the role of these DNA twins. Did they create life on Earth? The possibility of two identical DNAs as a coincidence is unthinkable. Charlie digs at Elizabeth, suggesting their existence disproves her beliefs. Her obvious response: Where did they come from? This puzzle is embedded in an adventure film that has staggering visuals, expert horror, mind-challenging ideas and enough unanswered questions to prime the inevitable sequel.
Wes Anderson's mind must be an exciting place for a story idea to be born. It immediately becomes more than a series of events and is transformed into a world with its own rules, in which everything is driven by emotions and desires as convincing as they are magical. Moonrise Kingdom creates such a world and takes place on an island that might as well be ruled by Prospero. It's set in 1965, though it might as well be set at any time.
On this island no one seems to live except for those involved in the story. There is a lighthouse in which the heroine, Suzy, lives with her family, and a Scout camp where the hero, Sam, stirs restlessly under what seem to him childish restrictions. Sam and Suzy met the previous summer and have been pen pals ever since, plotting a sort of jailbreak from their lives during which they could have an adventure out from under the thumbs of adults, if only for a week.
Sam is an orphan, solemn behind oversized eyeglasses, an expert in scouting. Suzy is bookish, a dreamer. When they have their long-planned secret rendezvous in a meadow on the island, Sam is burdened with all the camping and survival gear they will possibly need, and Suzy has provided for herself some books to read, her kitten and a portable 45 rpm record player with extra batteries.
Because this is a Wes Anderson film, you know Bill Murray will appear in it. He has worked in the last five of Anderson's six films. In Moonrise Kingdom, he plays Walt Bishop, Suzy's father, and Frances McDormand is her mother. Murray is always right for a role in an Anderson film, and I wonder if it's because they share a bemused sadness. You can't easily imagine Murray playing a manic or a cut-up; his eyes, which have always been old eyes, look upon the world and waver between concern and disappointment. In Anderson's films, there is a sort of resignation to the underlying melancholy of the world; he is the only American director I can think of whose work reflects the Japanese concept mono no aware, which describes a wistfulness about the transience of things. Even Sam and Suzy, sharing the experience of a lifetime, seem aware that this will be their last summer for such an adventure. Next year they will be too old for such irresponsibility.
It is not a large island, but they think it must have a place where they can hide out. Sam has come prepared with maps for their trek, and they follow an old Indian trail to a secluded cove which they name Moonrise Kingdom. Here they make their camp, which a Scout leader is later to tell Sam is the best-pitched camp I have ever seen. And here, as they sit side by side and look out over the water, in a sense they regard the passage of innocence and the disturbing possibility of maturity.
Meanwhile, the adult world has launched a worried search for them. Suzy's parents call in the police, led by Capt. Sharp. Scoutmaster Ward leads Sam's fellow Scouts, who were not terrifically fond of the way he seemed to take the troop with less than utter dedication. A character known only as Social Services gets involved, because as an orphan, Sam is of special interest.
Anderson always fills his films with colors, never garish but usually definite and active. In Moonrise Kingdom, the palette tends toward the green of new grass, and the Scout's khaki brown. Also the right amount of red. It is a comfortable canvas to look at, so pretty that it helps establish the feeling of magical realism.
The approaching turmoil of adolescence is foretold, however, by an approaching hurricane that places the lives of the young explorers in danger. Their trek, their camp and the search for them under the mounting danger reminds me of the sort of serials I used to follow in Boy's Life magazine, although those regrettably were not co-ed.
The success of Moonrise Kingdom depends on its understated gravity. None of the actors ever play for laughs or put sardonic spins on their material. We don't feel they're kidding. Yes, we know these events are less than likely, and the film's entire world is fantastical. But what happens in a fantasy can be more involving than what happens in life, and thank goodness for that.
What sets this film above so many movies about animals is that it's about a dog who is realistic in every aspect. Quill: Life of a Guide Dog doesn't use fake closeups to show the dog being cute or funny. It doesn't dub Quill's dialogue or even worse, use CGI to move his jaw and show him speaking. Quill is a dog, and that is quite enough.
The Japanese-made movie is a fictionalized story, though based on fact, about the lifespan of a yellow Labrador retriever from his puppyhood to old age. Not for a moment did it lose my interest. It answers questions I've always had about guide dogs for the blind — and why blind people trust them without hesitation.
Quill's trainer, Satoru Tawada, narrates parts of the story, and the rest is depicted in dramatic scenes. It shows that much of the training of a guide dog is based on common sense. For example, imagine a group of puppies. You call them to come to you. They all eagerly run forward, except for one. Is that the dunce of the litter? Not at all. His hesitation shows he is naturally thoughtful and cautious. He's the one with guide dog potential.
We follow Quill as he lives for a year with a trainer, learning to obey so well that when told to stay, he will stay even in the face of temptations such as food. Obedience is combined with training in decision-making. If an owner tells a dog to lead him into traffic, the dog will think it over and decide maybe not.
Quill learns how to pause at curbs and steps. How to gently stand in front of an owner to cue him to pause, without tripping him. How to deal with corners and street crossings. How to ignore other dogs. When this training has been completed, Quill begins a training regime with the blind man who will become his owner. This is Mitsuru Watanabe, who is not some lovable little child but a grouchy man who doesn't much like dogs. Quill has to be more accepting than his owner.
Labradors are now considered even better guide dogs than German shepherds, we learn, and Quill seems eager to be a good dog, even though his new human family makes him stay outside in a doghouse that isn't large enough. As John McPhee wrote in a memorable essay, dogs for some reason have evolved to consider humans their gods. They love us, listen to us, are happy when they help us. The only bad dogs are those with bad masters.
Recent studies have found that dogs follow the eyes of humans in order to find out what they're looking at. Few other animals have a conception of the gaze of those not of their species. Dogs notice, they share, they draw conclusions, they like it when they're able to be of service and are touchingly grateful when they're praised.
Quill is not a children's movie, but it would be excellent for children who can read the easily comprehensible subtitles. Its storytelling is clear enough the titles might not even be necessary. Kids may appreciate an honest film about a real dog after being regaled with the stupidities of animated pigs. Adult viewers may find lots of interest, too. For example, in Japan, guide dogs are trained to respond to commands in English. Why? Because everyone around them speaks Japanese, so there's a possibility of misunderstood commands from others. Makes sense to me.
One of the weapons Marvel used in its climb to comic-book dominance was a willingness to invent new characters at a dizzying speed. There are so many Marvel universes, indeed, that some superheroes do not even exist in one another's worlds, preventing gridlock. The Avengers however do share the same time and space continuum, although in recent years, they've been treated in separate, single-superhero movies. One assumes the idle Avengers follow the exploits of the employed ones on the news.
The Avengers, much awaited by Marvel comics fans, assembles all of the Avengers in one film: Iron Man, Captain America, Thor, the Hulk, the Black Widow and Hawkeye. This is like an all-star game, or the chef's sampling menu at a fancy restaurant. What always strikes me is how different their superpowers are. Iron Man is just an ordinary guy until he's wearing his super-suit. Thor swings a mighty hammer. Hawkeye wields a bow with arrows so powerful they can bring down alien spacecraft. The Hulk is a mild-mannered guy until he gets angry, and then he expands into a leaping, bounding green muscle man who can rip apart pretty much anything. Captain America has a powerful and versatile shield. Then there's Natasha, aka the Black Widow. After seeing the film, I discussed her with movie critics from Brazil and India, and we were unable to come up with a satisfactory explanation for her superpowers; it seems she is merely a martial artist with good aim with weapons. We decided maybe she and Hawkeye aren't technically superheroes, but just hang out in the same crowd.
When I see these six together, I can't help thinking of the champions at the Westminster Dog Show. You have breeds that seem completely different from one another, and yet they're all champions.
The reason they're brought together in The Avengers is that the Earth is under threat by the smirking Loki, Thor's adopted brother, who controls the Tesseract, a pulsing cube of energy that opens a gateway to the universe; through it, he plans to attack Earth with his fleet of reptile-looking monster-machines. It goes completely unexplained where Loki now resides, how these dragon-machines are manufactured, and so on. Both Loki and Thor are obscurely related to the gods of Norse mythology, as we know from last year's Thor, but let's not drift into theology.
Nick Fury sends out a call to the Avengers to team up and meet this threat. He runs SHIELD, the Strategic Homeland Intervention, Enforcement and Logistics Division, which is all I know about it. He's headquartered on a gigantic aircraft carrier that's also a hovercraft and can become invisible. By bringing the Avengers together, he of course reopens ancient rivalries, until they learn the benefits of Teamwork, which is discussed in speeches of noble banality. So you see this is sort of an educational film, teaching the Avengers to do what was so highly valued on my first-grade report card: the concept of Working Well With Others.
These films are all more or less similar, and The Avengers gives us much, much more of the same. There must be a threat. The heroes must be enlisted. The villain must be dramatized. Some personality defects are probed. And then the last hour or so consists of special effects in which large mechanical objects engage in combat that results in deafening crashes and explosions and great balls of fire.
Much of this battle takes place in midtown Manhattan, where the neatest sequences involve Loki's ginormous slithering, undulating snake-lizard-dragon machine, which seems almost to have a mind of its own and is backed up by countless snakelings. At one point, an Avenger flies into the mouth of this leviathan and penetrates its entire length, emerging at the business end. You won't see that in The Human Centipede.
Comic-Con nerds will have multiple orgasms, predicts critic David Edelstein in New York magazine, confirming something I had vaguely suspected about them. If he is correct, it's time for desperately needed movies to re-educate nerds in the joys of sex. The Avengers is done well by Joss Whedon, with style and energy. It provides its fans with exactly what they desire. Whether it is exactly what they deserve is arguable.
Boy is narrated by its title character, called that name by everyone, an enormously likable 11-year-old Maori kid who lives in a village near the Bay of Plenty in New Zealand. It's 1984, which becomes unmistakable when we note that his younger brother is named Rocky, two characters are Dallas and Dynasty, and Michael Jackson's Thriller video is the central fact of his life.
Before the story even takes shape, Boy impresses us as smart, with a lively imagination; he has the most responsibility of anyone in the crowd of children he joins every day on the beach. Does he even notice what breathtaking scenery surrounds him? We learn that Boy's mother died giving birth to Rocky. Boy idealizes his absent father as a version of Michael Jackson. He and Rocky live with his grandmother, who leaves for a funeral in an opening scene.
Then a big ol' car comes swerving up a country road in a cloud of dust, and the man at the wheel introduces himself as Boy's father. This is Alamein. He looks a little like Dennis Hopper in Easy Rider, and easily smokes as much pot. The two clueless guys in the front seat with him are allegedly members of the motorcycle gang he leads, although at no time does he ever produce a motorcycle.
Alamein, apparently named after the famous battle, has been absent for a good reason: He's just finished a prison sentence. He's returned in part to see Boy, and in larger part to find a bundle of loot he wrapped in plastic and buried somewhere in a pasture. The treasure spot should line up with some trees, although after all this time, he doesn't quite remember just which ones.
A few elements could possibly overwhelm Boy. The father could turn out to be bad to the bone, introducing a threat to the son. And the movie, which includes flip-card style animation, threatens to go overboard on flashy style. Neither thing happens, and what gradually reveals itself is a bittersweet coming-of-age experience in which Boy outgrows his hero worship and realizes most of Alamein's most admirable qualities exist only in his imagination.
The film contains a great deal of offhand information about this Maori community. Much of it is about how global pop culture has imposed an imaginary media reality on children's lives. I was reminded of Whale Rider, a New Zealand film about a 12-year-old girl who would be next in line as chief of her tribe — if only she weren't a girl.
Unlike the depth and detail of that film, with its meetings of tribal elders and their debates about traditions, Boy shows a community adrift in the present.
Boy and his contemporaries are basically raising themselves. His father gives him a sip of beer, and he helps himself to pot. This is alarming, but there's a bedrock common sense in his makeup that helps him see his father as an inconsequential man, and when the old man finally leaves, it is in the nature of a depressed retreat. He can't even impress his own son.
The film is delightful in its colorful production values, with animated and fantasy interludes, many of which center on the dead mother's tombstone, where Rocky spends many hours. Its surface is decorated with his bright designs and pictures, which seem to celebrate the dead woman. What a contrast with the living, who Boy and his pal observe from the shadows as they hang out on the porch of a store, get drunk, smoke weed and kill time.
A film like this would have little chance without the right casting, and James Rolleston is so right as Boy, it's difficult to imagine anyone else. Waititi apparently found him as an extra on the film and substituted him only two days before shooting began for the lead actor he'd already cast. Like many child actors, he has a natural quality adults can only envy. Waititi himself is also crucial in the film; he's an irresponsible dad but not cruel or indifferent, and he extracts low-key humor from the character. It's not a surprise to learn he's a stand-up comic in New Zealand.
The question the film doesn't need to pose is: What direction will Boy's life take? Rocky seems already pulled toward art. Boy's imagination was occupied by his father, until he met him. Now what? When Taika Waititi was working on this screenplay at the Sundance Writers' Lab, its working title was Choice.
