That law is an indispensable fourth cardinal basic need of mankind has become a stark reality in the 21st century. Law provides certainty to rules of conduct. The importance and function of law is increasingly felt like never before. Law no longer confines its scope to maintaining peace and security and to providing mechanism for delivering justice but has also become a constructive instrument for a positive social change and order. Today, mankind is collectively a refugee under the regimes of rules of law. Through law making conventions, we are engaged in reconciling our disagreements, dissenting ideologies and conflicts to solve problems which are common to and which threaten our collective human existence. Indeed, law is the only key and resolution for a secured, peaceful and ordered human survival today and tomorrow. It will remain as a universal truth which could only be reversed when humans are born without social character or simply when opposite sex fails to attract. The students of LMS Law College condemn and challenge the narrow perceptions which hold that there is no need of any rule of law in our society and that law as an academic discipline is inferior to other counter-part courses.
Certain notable remarks made by some resource persons at the recently held "Extension Lecture on Career Advancement" on 3rd April, 2010 at the LMS Law College, Imphal is reproduced here which directly falls within the scope of this write up. Former Judge C Upendra remarked that there cannot be a society without law. Law exists only for the society. No law no society. The legal philosophy of Von Savingny is reflected here. Law grows with the growth of the society and gains its strength from the society itself and finally withers away as the nation loses its nationality. Law, language, customs and Government have no separate existence from the people who follow. Law existed ever since mankind had begun to organize amongst themselves. Before customs which is the socially accepted norm, there were usages which are unrefined practices and sometimes discontinued. Simply put, usage precedes custom, ie customs begin where usage ends. By now, mankind might be having a thousand billion legislations or declared laws. But still, we rely on a universe of uncodified customs which are sometimes more powerful and effective than an enacted or written law. Legislation is the first and primary source of law as is the law made by treaty or convention in international plane. Judiciary also makes law which is called judicial precedents.
Decisions of the Courts are rules of law made by the process of judicial legislation wherein the court is asked to determine appropriate rule of law for a given case. Legislation cannot always provide each and every law which is needed for a constantly changing and complex society of today. The courts while determining law in cases for which no certain rule of law is available to apply, lay down appropriate laws which are also otherwise called judge-made law. Decisions of the Supreme Court and High Courts in the domestic plane and the International Court of Justice, International Crimes Tribunals in the international arena, among others are concrete examples. Thus, we rely on three major sources of law. The remarkable statement made by the former Sessions and District Judge, C Upendra at the CNN-IBN documentary on fake-encounter killings in Manipur "True Lies in Manipur" that they (the armed security forces of the State) do whatever they like triggers off academic-activist challenges to those who are committed to the protection and upholding of such basic human and legal values as justice, the rule of law, inalienable human rights and constitutionalism. The recent shoot out which injured the Advocate General and other such similar instances brings the challenge in lime light. It is not an injury done to any particular physical person but it is a rape of the rule of law and core values of our society. How do we respond to it in such situation reflects our civilization. VR Krishna Iyer, former Supreme Court Judge stated the progress or otherwise of a people depends on their level of respect for human rights.
That people which fail to ensure basic human and legal values to prevail is not a civilized society. This perhaps, is the much needed definition of a civilized society in the 21st century. Emphasising the importance of law in a society in the same line with C Upendra, former Advocate General Hijam Nabakumar, who had taught law in the college for over a period of 17 years, stated that the profession of legal advocacy is a noble and highly respectable. The senior advocate stated that lawyers and advocates are hated professionals but are still necessary for a society. Marxian theory of law that law is a necessary evil is truly reflected here. Law indeed, if used for exploitation and suppression is evil. The colonial world bears concrete testimony. The AFSPA is typical neo-colonial legislation. Marxian theory of law might not be totally true in modern welfare States. Welfare of the general people has become the prime legal obligation. In such welfare States, law has come to mean welfare laws. But still we find laws which give privilege to or favor certain classified class or sections of people as in India. Such laws are qualified and justified for its aim is to enable the weaker sections of the society to come forward by providing such privileges which is for a limited time. Categorisation of people economically, socially and educationally has legal-time limits. The statement which Professor Amar Yumnam made as a Dean of the School of Social Sciences, MU is encouraging.
He stated that those Universities which maintain vibrant and dynamic legal studies are widely known for their academic efficiency. He stressed the urgent need for opening a Department of Law at the MU. He stated the Dean's Office would give first priority to improving law as an academic discipline: This is indeed, a statement from a dynamic intellectual of the Manipur University. The students of law express gratitude to Professor Amar Yumnam for his sensibilities and concerns about legal studies. His mobilization of the students of law is worthy to note. You have bright prospects... the world is yours. It is a fact that the society needs people who know law in every walk of life. Indeed, a long felt word of encouragement from a responsible academician of the MU has really touched and inspired many students to pursue their career with objectivity. But still we anticipate further commitments and processes to improving legal studies. Former Deans of the same school had deliberately failed or feared to discuss about law as an independent academic discipline not to talk of improving or giving its due legitimate academic accommodation at the MU with a Department under a School of Law. They are remembered for their narrow academic perceptions, insensibilities, discrimination and poor judgment. It is highly questionable to the perceptions as to why law as an academic discipline should not be given its due space with a Department under a School of Law at the MU. Why should law (legal studies) be regulated under the Department of Political Science? How could such practices be justified which is not found elsewhere? Would our friends of the Political Science Department of the MU accept to regulate or affiliate their political science studies under a Department or School of Law? Why should you do something which is not desirable to be done to you by others? Refute these questions and justify your arguments. Students of law challenge your poor academic perceptions, insensibilities and ill informed convictions.
The dictionary describes morality as principles concerning the distinction between right and wrong, good and bad behavior. Our society as a whole has lived by a moral code for many centuries yet we do not really acknowledge the meaning of morality to ourselves. It is rooted in us from the day we are born, but many of us live all their lives never realizing why is it that some things make them feel guilty, or some things need to be lied about, and some things they have to accomplish during the course of their life, to be accepted or accredited on a certain level by the society.
Hobbes gives a great overview on the perspective of morality and on a society without it. If the world lived by the laws of nature, there would be every man for itself, and they would live in a constant fear of death. Nobody would have a sense of helping anther, but every person next to them would be a rival in the world of fight. If two people are in a quest for the same goal, they become enemies – how far will they go in a world with no moral rules? Probably to death, which would make the society a chaotic one, full of anarchy.
Fortunately, our society is used to having morality. We have a social contract that we live by. Hobbs says, that as long as most of us agree with the social contract and moral rules, the more better off we will all be and the easier our life will go on as a society. Of course some might argue , that these "rules" are chaining us down, and are not giving us total freedom, but these "rules" are only here in order to help the society as a whole, flourish. The rules and regulations, yes, maybe restrict our freedom, but only to an extent and only so people will have much greater freedom and wellbeing.
Pojman brings out a great example of a society without any moral rules in respect of W.Golding's novel "Lord of the Flies". At first the children are extremely excited that there are no adults around any longer to tell them what to do, and they can play on the beach all day long if they want to, and do anything they want for that matter. Soon the older kids start to realize that living this way cannot go on – they start to make rules, they need to have regular meetings where only one can speak at a time, and they have a democratic voting on who they want as their leader. So this "morality" and need for some orderly system in the society is embedded in us from childhood. Of course there are a few renegades in the society who do not obey to those regulations, just as in Golding's book. This only leads to chaos, death and grief, and no good can come of this – only that everyone sees furthermore how much rules are needed. In a society it is crucial to have them to prevent a large scale "Lord of the Flies" from happening.
A society or a group of people cannot coexist without any moral regulations. We need morality in order to keep our society from falling apart and resolve conflicts in an orderly fashion. In each of us there is a devil that unleashes whenever there is a conflict of interest or a moral lassitude, but if we do not keep up with the moral conscious inside, we will loose the ground from under our feet quickly and we loose all sense of reality – and become animals living in a world with nature's rules.
There is a beautiful story in the Ramayana concerning a young man named Shravan Kumar who is devoted to his parents. Both of Shravan's parents are blind and cannot take care of themselves; they depend exclusively on Shravan for their day-to-day needs. One day, the parents tell Shravan that they are now getting very old and they might die at any time. Before they die, they want to go on a pilgrimage. Since they are blind and old, they cannot walk great distances. Therefore, Shravan creates a carrier for this parents out of two wooden hampers — commonly made out of dry wooden sticks. He makes his two parents sit on the two hampers and carries them to numerous places of pilgrimage.
During the travel to places of pilgrimage, Shravan comes to a place near Ayodhya, which was at that time ruled by King Daśaratha — the father of Lord Rama. Shravan's parents are thirsty, and it is rather late in the night. They ask Shravan to find some water for them, and Shravan goes looking for water, finds the river Sarayu and starts filling a pot with water. While Shravan is filling his water pot, King Daśaratha is out hunting. He hears the gurgling of the water pot that Shravan is filling and thinks that it must be an animal drinking water from the river; he shoots an arrow in the dark, which hits Shravan, who cries in pain.
On hearing the cries of a human being, King Daśaratha is shocked because he intended to kill an animal, not a human being. He runs in direction where he had shot the arrow only to find Shravan lying in a pool of blood. Shravan tells the King that his parents are waiting for him to return with water, and the King must give them the pot filled with water and tell them about their son's demise. Shravan then dies. With deep remorse, King Daśaratha finds Shravan's parents, gives them water and then informs them of the accidental death of their son. Both parents are struck by grief, and decide to give up their lives, as there is no one left to take care of them. Before leaving their bodies, they tell King Daśaratha, that he too will die out of separation from his beloved son — which eventually comes true when Lord Rama is sent to the forest for fourteen years to fulfill His step-mother's request.
I narrate this story here because I grew up listening to it during childhood, and it had a deep impact on me; Shravan Kumar was considered a hero who had devoted his life to the service of his parents, and died in that effort. I wasn't alone because this was a common story that many children heard from their parents or grandparents, and it indicated the importance society attributed to the care of the elderly. The moral of the story was that young people must take care of the family elders, rather than leave them alone.
Every society feeds stories to its people, particularly during their childhood. These stories are about two classes of individuals — which we broadly call heroes and villains. By defining the traits of heroes and villains, society defines how it expects its members to behave ideally, and what it doesn't want its members to do. Once these stories are set, they acquire mythic status, and men or women are elevated to heroes and villains.
A modern example of such a story is the American Dream which represents the idea that a common man can become rich, successful, and famous through the sheer dint of their hard work and brilliance. John D. Rockefeller is one of the earliest people who epitomized this dream; he grew up in rather difficult conditions but through a combination of hard work and guile became the world's richest man. Andrew Carnegie is another early example of such cult status because he too grew up in impoverished conditions and rose to be extremely rich, and philanthropic. In recent times, Bill Gates and Steve Jobs have attained mythic and cult status by giving up education — at a huge risk — to pursue their personal dreams, and indeed became successful. The business and technology world tells their stories over and over; their lives are taught in entrepreneur schools as case studies.
All societies are built on stories of great highs and immense lows. We cannot change society without changing their stories. In fact, you cannot even transform your life without the story of a role model, hero, or superman, who you are going to follow. If you haven't heard of great stories, or you were never inspired by such stories, your life is probably insipid. Everyone who is leading an inspired life has a role model or a hero.
Carl Jung, a famous Swiss psychiatrist, wrote extensively about the collective unconscious — which, for him, epitomized the collection of widespread ideas such as Mother Earth, Wise Old Man, the Tree of Life, etc. which Jung called archetypes. The term "archetype" has its roots in Greek, where the root word archein means "original" and the root word typos means "type". The word "archetypes" therefore means the "original types", from which other similar persons, objects, or modified archetypes can be derived.
One of the key archetypes for Jung is the division of myths into heroes and villains. The hero's main feat is to overcome the monster of darkness: it is the long-hoped-for and expected triumph of consciousness over the unconscious. Also, he is no hero who never met the dragon, or who, if he once saw it, declared afterwards that he saw nothing. Equally, only one who has risked the fight with the dragon and is not overcome by it wins the hoard, the treasure hard to attain.
The hero symbolizes a man's unconscious self, and this manifests itself empirically as the sum total of all archetypes and therefore includes the archetype of the father and of the wise old man. To that extent the hero is his own father and his own begetter. One of the most interesting aspects of Jung's work is that nearly all archetypes are personalities rather than non-living things or impersonal ideas. This is a significant departure from Greek philosophy which viewed the original ideas impersonally as static forms in a Platonic world. It is also a significant departure from Freudian psychology which viewed the human mind as pervaded by lust and sex, rather than some original ideas such as the The Great Mother or The Great Father which rule our conscious thinking. Personalizing the abstract ideas into forms that live in our minds collectively as heroes of ideal behavior is Jung's significant contribution. However, Jung did not explore the implications of archetypes onto the formation of society itself.
While Jung recognized that all societies have archetypes, he did not go far enough to describe how the structure of the society (e.g. whether society is classful or classless), the kinds of activities and moralities that occur in that society, its general direction over time, and its value system that in turn dictates what the society considers lawfully acceptable behavior are all dictated by archetypes. I will make that claim here.
That claim rests on the premise that while each society carries many archetypes, only some of these are elevated to a heroic status. For example, The Girl Next Door is an archetype in many societies which symbolizes simplicity, dutifulness, and honesty, with a warm, charming persona. Similarly, The Eternal Explorer is an archetype in many places, and symbolizes a person who is unprepared for a commitment, who doesn't want to take responsibility, who cannot settle down, is always bored and seeking thrill, and fears getting trapped into social conformities. In most progressive societies, The Eternal Explorer is often idolized but The Girl Next Door is not. Conversely, in most conservative societies, The Girl Next Door is idolized while The Eternal Explorer is frowned upon.
Progressive and conservative societies, therefore, have different role models. Similarly, the East and the West have different heroes. The materialists and the spiritualists worship different idols. And each race and nation eulogize different stars. The reason is that society cannot exist without leaders who symbolize the ideal values of their system.
There cannot be a society without a god or gods who embody and personalize its morality, behavior, and norms. Whenever society lacks heroes, role models, idols, and stars, it will decay and will be decimated by another society that has stronger heroes, because that hero will energize, motivate, inspire, and encourage other people to be like him or her. The strength of a society is therefore in the strength of its leaders. In Vedic philosophy, God is the center of society because He is the hero, the role model, the icon, the idol, and the star. He is worshiped just like ordinary icons, idols, and stars are worshiped. The sign of the hero is that he is a winner — he fights the demons and slays the evil. He is the light that dissipates the darkness. The Christian distinction between God and evil exists in Vedic philosophy as Īśvara and māyā. God or Īśvara is the hero, while māyā is the devil; ironically, though, māyā is not truly fighting God; rather māyā creates the circumstances in which God can play the role of the great hero. Every hero needs a villain; in the material world, therefore, māyā is the villain to make God the hero.
The center of the world is light and the edge of the world is darkness; everything in between is society. In Vedic cosmology, the universe is divided into two parts — loka, the lighted part and āloka, the dark part. Between the loka and āloka lies the lokāloka boundary. Every part of the loka world is considered to have a society or social organization. The world beyond the lokāloka boundary has no society. This means that social living beings don't exist there because there is no role model, idol, or hero, who can provide the inspiration to the common living entities by which they can be organized.
It also means that as we move farther and farther from the center — i.e. the hero or the icon who settles norms of ideal behavior — there comes a point at which we become free radicals who have no aim or purpose in life. Without a center that holds us together, we roam the material world aimlessly, looking for that hero whom we can follow, because by following that hero, our life too would become meaningful and not purposeless.
Many people in modern times believe that the powers of nations and societies are based on their economics, military might, intellectual abilities, or their racial superiority. This is not true. The strength and longevity of a society depend on the stature of its heroes. If people lose faith in their heroes, then everything — economics, military might, intellect, or racial superiority — will eventually collapse. The smart tacticians, therefore, work not on hurting a society's economics or military, but to discredit their heroes. Once people lose their heroes, they will roam aimlessly without a vision, looking for a new hero. Conversely, those aiming to build a new society must aspire to create new role models and icons. A society cannot be organized simply by the strength of power, wealth, renunciation, and beauty — the other qualities which also pervade the world and which we often consider to be the main ingredients of success. Rather, we require the quality of heroism or leadership, by which a center is created. This heroism or leadership is the idea of goodness or morality which creates the trust in society. Leaders are those that most people can trust; society disintegrates when it loses the trust in its leadership.
The modern world of democracy is built on the rejection of the Divine Rights of the Kings. The basic premise is that nobody is a leader by default, and leaders will automatically emerge from society. This is not a bad idea, except that society must stress the creation of moral leadership for setting the examples that other people can follow. If the leaders become corrupt, the people will lose faith in their leadership and seek other leaders. The old leaders can survive for some time based on the strength of wealth, power, renunciation, or beauty, but they cannot survive for long without goodness.
With the above background on heroism and leadership, I will now turn to the discussion of these ideas in the context of Vedic philosophy and relate it to the six qualities discussed previously. Śrīla Prabhupāda opens the Śrimad Bhāgavatam with a stunning introduction.
The conception of God and the conception of Absolute Truth are not on the same level. The Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam hits on the target of the Absolute Truth. The conception of God indicates the controller, whereas the conception of the Absolute Truth indicates the summum bonum or the ultimate source of all energies. There is no difference of opinion about the personal feature of God as the controller because a controller cannot be impersonal. Of course, modern government, especially democratic government, is impersonal to some extent, but ultimately the chief executive head is a person, and the impersonal feature of government is subordinate to the personal feature. So without a doubt whenever we refer to control over others we must admit the existence of a personal feature. Because there are different controllers for different managerial positions, there may be many small gods. According to the Bhagavad-gītā, any controller who has some specific extraordinary power is called a vibhūtimat sattva, or controller empowered by the Lord. There are many vibhūtimat sattvas, controllers or gods with various specific powers, but the Absolute Truth is one without a second. This Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam designates the Absolute Truth or the summum bonum as the paraṁ satyam.
This introduction is amazing for several reasons. First, the distinction between Absolute Truth from Īśvara is amazing because it distinguishes Vedic philosophy from other religions; God is the supreme controller in other religions; however, knowledge is the supreme basis from which everything is created in Vedic philosophy. Second, the comparison of controllers to a government, the relation to various demigods — talking about an earthly and cosmic society—and then going back to the absolute knowledge as the summum bonum, indicates how pervasive this idea is: it exists not just spiritually but also as the principle of control here. Only a person as versatile as Śrīla Prabhupāda can talk about the origin of everything, government, social organization, demigods, personalism, impersonalism, their various powers, and energies — all in the first paragraph.
I'm still on the first sentence of the first paragraph, and it has taken me a while to just unpack the distinction between Absolute Truth and Īśvara, so let me just continue on that path! The Absolute Truth is the knowledge to which every other quality is applied. The Īśvara is the yashasvi or the famous who is the hero, the leader, the icon, or the star, who takes the role of the central controller. But the hero follows the knowledge. In other words, God as the supreme controller is not the creator of knowledge. Rather, the supreme controller is the first and the most ideal manifestation or incarnation of knowledge.
The Absolute Truth is Godhead. The Īśvara who follows from this Absolute Truth is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Absolute Truth is the original idea and Īśvara is the best idea. The original idea is the source of numerous ideas, but only one of these numerous ideas is the best idea. The Absolute Truth therefore manifests many ideas, beginning with the best idea. This can be further illustrated by an example.
Think of the idea of a car, using which many cars are produced. Some cars have big engines, others have big tires. Some guzzle a lot of gasoline, while others run very slowly. All such cars which go to the extremes in order to improve one particular feature, end up compromising other features. For example, the car that runs too fast is also uneconomical while it is running slowly. That car which can transport a lot of people will occupy a lot of space even when it is carrying a few passengers. Out of these numerous possible cars, there is one perfect car, which balances all the opposites. Such a car is not too big and not too small; it is not too fast, and also not very uneconomical. While other cars may excel in one feature or another, they would be missing the other features which are evident in the perfect car. This perfect car is therefore the icon for every other car to emulate. For example, the goal for every fast car designer would be to economize its fuel consumption, while the goal for every fuel efficient car would be to increase its speed.
In the same way, knowledge is the basis of all that is produced. But the first thing to be produced from this knowledge is the perfect thing. This perfection represents goodness. By manifesting the perfect thing, the original thing sets the example of ideality, before it creates non-ideal things. The words vāstavam atra vastu śivadaṁ are used; vāstav vastu means the "real thing", and śivadaṁ means the provider of the goodness. The Absolute Truth is the "real thing", and the perfect instance of that idea is the perfect goodness. Thus, the first thing to emerge from the "real thing" is goodness.
The Vedic texts describe how Kṛṣṇa is everything that exists or sat. He has an elder brother called Balarama — who is the chit. And Kṛṣṇa lives for the enjoyment of pleasure — Hara. Balarama is the elder brother of Kṛṣṇa because chit is higher than sat. As we have seen earlier, the chit creates the external personality of the soul, but Kṛṣṇa is different from this externally visible personality. Kṛṣṇa is instead defined by His individuality — i.e. the desire for pleasure, which is internal — which is also called Hara.
The chit or Balarama represents the original idea. From this original idea, a perfect idea called Saṅkarṣaṇa is created — and he is the famous hero. From Saṅkarṣaṇa, four other forms called Vasudeva, Saṅkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna, and Aniruddha are created. They are respectively the embodiment of wealth, power, beauty, and renunciation. Vasudeva has Lakshmi as His consort, who is the Goddess of wealth. Saṅkarṣaṇa is the embodiment of all power. Pradyumna is the most beautiful and therefore the cupid. Aniruddha is the most renounced; He, therefore, stands solitary as a mark of that renunciation.
The four forms of God are the four aspects of the chaturvyūha, denoting the four different qualities of God. There is another Saṅkarṣaṇa situated in the middle of this square—as the best and most famous leader. He rules the other four corners not just because he can acquire power, wealth, beauty, or renunciation, but because He has the moral authority based on goodness, perfection, or śivadaṁ. Saṅkarṣaṇa in the middle is, therefore, the most powerful, although his power is not strength, but heroism.
Like the archetypes in Jung's theories, the forms of knowledge, fame, wealth, power, beauty, and renunciation, are all persons. There is also a hierarchy in the forms which represents the order in which they are manifest: knowledge precedes the rest, fame follows knowledge and creates the perfect and most famous person, from this fame four qualities, are successively created — wealth, power, beauty, and renunciation. This hierarchy of qualities has some important implications for social organization.
For instance, it means that the leaders in society cannot be elected based on wealth, power, or beauty, unless they have the moral heroism — i.e. the conviction to use their will to fight evil. Other attributes such as wealth, power, and beauty, come from the moral heroism. And once the hero has acquired all kinds of qualities, he can also stand detached from each one of them. The key point is that being a yashasvi who slays dragons and conquers evil is more important than wealth, power, beauty, and renunciation. And even more important than being the hero is being knowledgeable. Thus, a leader is defined first by knowledge, then by the desire to conquer evil, then by capabilities such as wealth, power, beauty, and renunciation, which act as assistants in the battle against evil.
At the present moment, most leaders are elected due to wealth, power, and beauty. Some are even elected due to poverty and being deprived. They are not true heroes and they don't represent goodness because they have no will to battle evil and deliver justice in society. Furthermore, they have very little knowledge to distinguish good from evil.
In Vedic social organization, knowledge is imparted by the Brahmana, the Kshatriya are the heroes who lead the battle against evil and deliver justice, the Vaisya are owners of wealth, power, and beauty, while the Sudra engage in labor and toil. Society is thus divided into four main classes as parts of a single body that must function as a whole.
The Kshatriya follow the Brahmana because they provide the discrimination between good and bad. The Vaisya follow the Kshatriya because they understand that a glorious leader is needed to run society—be the moral example and fight the injustices. The Sudra work for the Vaisya because they have wealth, power, and beauty. In today's time, knowledge and heroism have disappeared — thereby eliminating the Brahmana and Kshatriya. There are a few owners of all the wealth, power, and beauty — we consider these Vaisyas (businessmen, sportspersons, and movie stars) the leaders of society — which constitute about 1% of the population. The remaining 99% of the population is workers or Sudra. The Vedic Varna system is not an archaic social structure that has become meaningless now. Neither is this structure just a material principle of organizing society. Rather, the Varna system is the most scientific method of organizing society, and its structure is based on the different qualities and forms of Lord Viṣṇu. By imbibing this structure, the human society can be modeled after the spiritual society. But if we don't understand the scientific theory underlying the six qualities, how the qualities are related to the others or lack the knowledge that the world is built from transcendent qualities, then we will keep trying atheistic, impersonal, and ultimately ignorant models that are widely prevalent today. The atheistic models appear sweet in the beginning as they are based on the idea that everyone is free, that there is no authority to judge our actions, and that we are the masters of creating our own reality. But very soon we find that everyone has their own version of the truth and good, everyone is using their free will in whatever way they want, and everybody insists on not being judged by the others. Such a society can only result in disorganization and the quest for truly heroic leaders. But, sometimes the merits of a system are understood only by suffering the demerits of the alternative.
I noted earlier in this post that every society is built upon the stories of heroes. However, the ideal society is built upon those stories, which are in turn built on true knowledge. The tree of Vedic literature is hence organized with śruti as the true knowledge and smṛti as the stories based on this knoweldge. The śruti is the philosophical basis of the world — i.e. the Absolute Truth. The smṛti represents the perfect incarnation or example of that Absolute Truth. The śruti are meant for the highest class of people — the Brahmana — in society. The smṛti are the real-world practical guides and examples for the other three classes—Kshatriya, Vaishya, and Sudra. Both philosophy and heroic stories are needed today. By listening to the smṛti such as Śrimad Bhāgavatam we can find the real-world examples of the lives of heroes to be emulated. By listening to the śruti such as Bhagavad-Gita we can find the philosophical foundations on which we can understand why these stories are perfect and therefore worthy of emulation. The narrations of Śrimad Bhāgavatam are the stories of heroes, and the philosophy of Bhagavad-Gita is the true knowledge.
The joys and the hopes, the griefs and the anxieties of the men of this age, especially those who are poor or in any way afflicted, these are the joys and hopes, the griefs and anxieties of the followers of Christ. Indeed, nothing genuinely human fails to raise an echo in their hearts. For theirs is a community composed of men. United in Christ, they are led by the Holy Spirit in their journey to the Kingdom of their Father and they have welcomed the news of salvation which is meant for every man. That is why this community realizes that it is truly linked with mankind and its history by the deepest of bonds.
Never has the human race enjoyed such an abundance of wealth, resources and economic power, and yet a huge proportion of the worlds citizens are still tormented by hunger and poverty, while countless numbers suffer from total illiteracy. Never before has man had so keen an understanding of freedom, yet at the same time new forms of social and psychological slavery make their appearance. Although the world of today has a very vivid awareness of its unity and of how one man depends on another in needful solidarity, it is most grievously torn into opposing camps by conflicting forces. For political, social, economic, racial and ideological disputes still continue bitterly, and with them the peril of a war which would reduce everything to ashes. True, there is a growing exchange of ideas, but the very words by which key concepts are expressed take on quite different meanings in diverse ideological systems. Finally, man painstakingly searches for a better world, without a corresponding spiritual advancement.
Influenced by such a variety of complexities, many of our contemporaries are kept from accurately identifying permanent values and adjusting them properly to fresh discoveries. As a result, buffeted between hope and anxiety and pressing one another with questions about the present course of events, they are burdened down with uneasiness. This same course of events leads men to look for answers; indeed, it forces them to do so.
Today's spiritual agitation and the changing conditions of life are part of a broader and deeper revolution. As a result of the latter, intellectual formation is ever increasingly based on the mathematical and natural sciences and on those dealing with man himself, while in the practical order the technology which stems from these sciences takes on mounting importance.
This scientific spirit has a new kind of impact on the cultural sphere and on modes of thought. Technology is now transforming the face of the earth, and is already trying to master outer space. To a certain extent, the human intellect is also broadening its dominion over time: over the past by means of historical knowledge; over the future, by the art of projecting and by planning.
Advances in biology, psychology, and the social sciences not only bring men hope of improved self-knowledge; in conjunction with technical methods, they are helping men exert direct influence on the life of social groups.
At the same time, the human race is giving steadily-increasing thought to forecasting and regulating its own population growth. History itself speeds along on so rapid a course that an individual person can scarcely keep abreast of it. The destiny of the human community has become all of a piece, where once the various groups of men had a kind of private history of their own.
Thus, the human race has passed from a rather static concept of reality to a more dynamic, evolutionary one. In consequence there has arisen a new series of problems, a series as numerous as can be, calling for efforts of analysis and synthesis.
The truth is that the imbalances under which the modern world labors are linked with that more basic imbalance which is rooted in the heart of man. For in man himself many elements wrestle with one another. Thus, on the one hand, as a creature he experiences his limitations in a multitude of ways; on the other he feels himself to be boundless in his desires and summoned to a higher life. Pulled by manifold attractions he is constantly forced to choose among them and renounce some.
The People of God believes that it is led by the Lord's Spirit, Who fills the earth. Motivated by this faith, it labors to decipher authentic signs of God's presence and purpose in the happenings, needs and desires in which this People has a part along with other men of our age. For faith throws a new light on everything, manifests God's design for man's total vocation, and thus directs the mind to solutions which are fully human.
One of the salient features of the modern world is the growing interdependence of men one on the other, a development promoted chiefly by modern technical advances. Nevertheless brotherly dialogue among men does not reach its perfection on the level of technical progress, but on the deeper level of interpersonal relationships. These demand a mutual respect for the full spiritual dignity of the person. Christian revelation contributes greatly to the promotion of this communion between persons, and at the same time leads us to a deeper understanding of the laws of social life which the Creator has written into man's moral and spiritual nature.
Every day human interdependence grows more tightly drawn and spreads by degrees over the whole world. As a result the common good, that is, the sum of those conditions of social life which allow social groups and their individual members relatively thorough and ready access to their own fulfillment, today takes on an increasingly universal complexion and consequently involves rights and duties with respect to the whole human race. Every social group must take account of the needs and legitimate aspirations of other groups, and even of the general welfare of the entire human family.
At the same time, however, there is a growing awareness of the exalted dignity proper to the human person, since he stands above all things, and his rights and duties are universal and inviolable. Therefore, there must be made available to all men everything necessary for leading a life truly human, such as food, clothing, and shelter; the right to choose a state of life freely and to found a family, the right to education, to employment, to a good reputation, to respect, to appropriate information, to activity in accord with the upright norm of one's own conscience, to protection of privacy and rightful freedom even in matters religious.
Hence, the social order and its development must invariably work to the benefit of the human person if the disposition of affairs is to be subordinate to the personal realm and not contrariwise, as the Lord indicated when He said that the Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath.
This social order requires constant improvement. It must be founded on truth, built on justice and animated by love; in freedom it should grow every day toward a more humane balance. An improvement in attitudes and abundant changes in society will have to take place if these objectives are to be gained.
God's Spirit, Who with a marvelous providence directs the unfolding of time and renews the face of the earth, is not absent from this development. The ferment of the Gospel too has aroused and continues to arouse in man's heart the irresistible requirements of his dignity.
In our times a special obligation binds us to make ourselves the neighbor of every person without exception and of actively helping him when he comes across our path, whether he be an old person abandoned by all, a foreign laborer unjustly looked down upon, a refugee, a child born of an unlawful union and wrongly suffering for a sin he did not commit, or a hungry person who disturbs our conscience by recalling the voice of the Lord, "As long as you did it for one of these the least of my brethren, you did it for me" (Matt. 25:40).
Furthermore, whatever is opposed to life itself, such as any type of murder, genocide, abortion, euthanasia or wilful self-destruction, whatever violates the integrity of the human person, such as mutilation, torments inflicted on body or mind, attempts to coerce the will itself; whatever insults human dignity, such as subhuman living conditions, arbitrary imprisonment, deportation, slavery, prostitution, the selling of women and children; as well as disgraceful working conditions, where men are treated as mere tools for profit, rather than as free and responsible persons; all these things and others of their like are infamies indeed. They poison human society, but they do more harm to those who practice them than those who suffer from the injury. Moreover, they are supreme dishonor to the Creator.
Respect and love ought to be extended also to those who think or act differently than we do in social, political and even religious matters. In fact, the more deeply we come to understand their ways of thinking through such courtesy and love, the more easily will we be able to enter into dialogue with them.
This love and good will, to be sure, must in no way render us indifferent to truth and goodness. Indeed love itself impels the disciples of Christ to speak the saving truth to all men. But it is necessary to distinguish between error, which always merits repudiation, and the person in error, who never loses the dignity of being a person even when he is flawed by false or inadequate religious notions. God alone is the judge and searcher of hearts, for that reason He forbids us to make judgments about the internal guilt of anyone.
Since all men possess a rational soul and are created in God's likeness, since they have the same nature and origin, have been redeemed by Christ and enjoy the same divine calling and destiny, the basic equality of all must receive increasingly greater recognition.
True, all men are not alike from the point of view of varying physical power and the diversity of intellectual and moral resources. Nevertheless, with respect to the fundamental rights of the person, every type of discrimination, whether social or cultural, whether based on sex, race, color, social condition, language or religion, is to be overcome and eradicated as contrary to God's intent. For in truth it must still be regretted that fundamental personal rights are still not being universally honored. Such is the case of a woman who is denied the right to choose a husband freely, to embrace a state of life or to acquire an education or cultural benefits equal to those recognized for men.
Therefore, although rightful differences exist between men, the equal dignity of persons demands that a more humane and just condition of life be brought about. For excessive economic and social differences between the members of the one human family or population groups cause scandal, and militate against social justice, equity, the dignity of the human person, as well as social and international peace.
Human institutions, both private and public, must labor to minister to the dignity and purpose of man. At the same time let them put up a stubborn fight against any kind of slavery, whether social or political, and safeguard the basic rights of man under every political system. Indeed human institutions themselves must be accommodated by degrees to the highest of all realities, spiritual ones, even though meanwhile, a long enough time will be required before they arrive at the desired goal.
The more unified the world becomes, the more plainly do the offices of men extend beyond particular groups and spread by degrees to the whole world. Now a man can scarcely arrive at the needed sense of responsibility, unless his living conditions allow him to become conscious of his dignity, and to rise to his destiny by spending himself for God and for others. But human freedom is often crippled when a man encounters extreme poverty just as it withers when he indulges in too many of life's comforts and imprisons himself in a kind of splendid isolation. Freedom acquires new strength, by contrast, when a man consents to the unavoidable requirements of social life, takes on the manifold demands of human partnership, and commits himself to the service of the human community.
Human activity, to be sure, takes its significance from its relationship to man. Just as it proceeds from man, so it is ordered toward man. For when a man works he not only alters things and society, he develops himself as well. He learns much, he cultivates his resources, he goes outside of himself and beyond himself. Rightly understood this kind of growth is of greater value than any external riches which can be garnered. A man is more precious for what he is than for what he has.
Sacred Scripture teaches the human family what the experience of the ages confirms: that while human progress is a great advantage to man, it brings with it a strong temptation. For when the order of values is jumbled and bad is mixed with the good, individuals and groups pay heed solely to their own interests, and not to those of others. Thus it happens that the world ceases to be a place of true brotherhood. In our own day, the magnified power of humanity threatens to destroy the race itself.
That spirit of vanity and malice which transforms into an instrument of sin those human energies intended for the service of God and man.
The actions within marriage by which the couple are united intimately and chastely are noble and worthy ones. Expressed in a manner which is truly human, these actions promote that mutual self-giving by which spouses enrich each other with a joyful and a ready will.
From the moment of its conception life must be guarded with the greatest care while abortion and infanticide are unspeakable crimes.
Culture, because it flows immediately from the spiritual and social character of man, has constant need of a just liberty in order to develop; it needs also the legitimate possibility of exercising its autonomy according to its own principles. It therefore rightly demands respect and enjoys a certain inviolability within the limits of the common good, as long, of course, as it preserves the rights of the individual and the community, whether particular or universal.
We must strive to provide for those men who are gifted the possibility of pursuing higher studies; and in such a way that, as far as possible, they may occupy in society those duties, offices and services which are in harmony with their natural aptitude and the competence they have acquired.
Let Christians cooperate so that the cultural manifestations and collective activity characteristic of our time may be imbued with a human and a Christian spirit.
The contrast between the economically more advanced countries and other countries is becoming more serious day by day, and the very peace of the world can be jeopardized thereby. Although recourse must always be had first to a sincere dialogue between the parties, a strike, nevertheless, can remain even in present-day circumstances a necessary, though ultimate, aid for the defense of the workers' own rights and the fulfillment of their just desires.
Citizens must cultivate a generous and loyal spirit of patriotism, but without being narrow-minded. This means that they will always direct their attention to the good of the whole human family, united by the different ties which bind together races, people and nations.
Peace is not merely the absence of war; nor can it be reduced solely to the maintenance of a balance of power between enemies; nor is it brought about by dictatorship. Instead, it is rightly and appropriately called an enterprise of justice. Peace results from that order structured into human society by its divine Founder, and actualized by men as they thirst after ever greater justice. The common good of humanity finds its ultimate meaning in the eternal law. But since the concrete demands of this common good are constantly changing as time goes on, peace is never attained once and for all, but must be built up ceaselessly. Moreover, since the human will is unsteady and wounded by sin, the achievement of peace requires a constant mastering of passions and the vigilance of lawful authority.
But this is not enough. This peace on earth cannot be obtained unless personal well-being is safeguarded and men freely and trustingly share with one another the riches of their inner spirits and their talents. A firm determination to respect other men and peoples and their dignity, as well as the studied practice of brotherhood are absolutely necessary for the establishment of peace. Hence peace is likewise the fruit of love, which goes beyond what justice can provide.
By virtue of her mission to shed on the whole world the radiance of the Gospel message, and to unify under one Spirit all men of whatever nation, race or culture, the Church stands forth as a sign of that brotherhood which allows honest dialogue and gives it vigor. Such a mission requires in the first place that we foster within the Church herself mutual esteem, reverence and harmony, through the full recognition of lawful diversity. Thus all those who compose the one People of God, both pastors and the general faithful, can engage in dialogue with ever abounding fruitfulness. For the bonds which unite the faithful are mightier than anything dividing them. Hence, let there be unity in what is necessary; freedom in what is unsettled, and charity in any case.
Our hearts embrace also those brothers and communities not yet living with us in full communion; to them we are linked nonetheless by our profession of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, and by the bond of charity. We do not forget that the unity of Christians is today awaited and desired by many, too, who do not believe in Christ; for the farther it advances toward truth and love under the powerful impulse of the Holy Spirit, the more this unity will be a harbinger of unity and peace for the world at large. Therefore, by common effort and in ways which are today increasingly appropriate for seeking this splendid goal effectively, let us take pains to pattern ourselves after the Gospel more exactly every day, and thus work as brothers in rendering service to the human family. For, in Christ Jesus this family is called to the family of the sons of God.
We think cordially too of all who acknowledge God, and who preserve in their traditions precious elements of religion and humanity. We want frank conversation to compel us all to receive the impulses of the Spirit faithfully and to act on them energetically.
For our part, the desire for such dialogue, which can lead to truth through love alone, excludes no one, though an appropriate measure of prudence must undoubtedly be exercised. We include those who cultivate outstanding qualities of the human spirit, but do not yet acknowledge the Source of these qualities. We include those who oppress the Church and harass her in manifold ways. Since God the Father is the origin and purpose of all men, we are all called to be brothers. Therefore, if we have been summoned to the same destiny, human and divine, we can and we should work together without violence and deceit in order to build up the world in genuine peace.
Mindful of the Lord's saying: "by this will all men know that you are my disciples, if you have love for one another" (John 13:35), Christians cannot yearn for anything more ardently than to serve the men of the modern world with mounting generosity and success. Therefore, by holding faithfully to the Gospel and benefiting from its resources, by joining with every man who loves and practices justice, Christians have shouldered a gigantic task for fulfillment in this world, a task concerning which they must give a reckoning to Him who will judge every man on the last of days.
Not everyone who cries, "Lord, Lord", will enter into the kingdom of heaven, but those who do the Father's will by taking a strong grip on the work at hand. Now, the Father wills that in all men we recognize Christ our brother and love Him effectively, in word and in deed. By thus giving witness to the truth, we will share with others the mystery of the heavenly Father's love. As a consequence, men throughout the world will be aroused to a lively hope — the gift of the Holy Spirit — that some day at last they will be caught up in peace and utter happiness in that fatherland radiant with the glory of the Lord.
Now to Him who is able to accomplish all things in a measure far beyond what we ask or conceive, in keeping with the power that is at work in us — to Him be glory in the Church and in Christ Jesus, down through all the ages of time without end.
